[Amit Varma]: How do we become good at something? My answer to this may seem glib, but I can't help it
[Amit Varma]: because it's true. You become good at something by doing it again and again. Constant iteration
[Amit Varma]: is the only way to improve. And it helps if you love this thing that you're doing again
[Amit Varma]: and again, you're more engaged with it, then you care about the result, as opposed to working
[Amit Varma]: in a boring office job where you're paid to do the same thing for years and years, and
[Amit Varma]: you're just going through the motions. Now, when I look back on my own life, I realized
[Amit Varma]: that I got good at the things I am good at by doing them again and again. But in the
[Amit Varma]: beginning, I sucked. I wanted to be a writer since I was five or six years old. But when
[Amit Varma]: I look at the writing I did in my 20s, and even some of my 30s, it is cringeworthy. I
[Amit Varma]: was bad to begin with. Everyone is bad to begin with whenever they start whatever they're
[Amit Varma]: doing. The trick is to keep at it. I started my blog India Uncut around 2003. And for five
[Amit Varma]: years, I did an average of five posts a day. The 8000 posts I wrote in this time made it
[Amit Varma]: a fantastic gym for my writing muscles. Iteration made me better. Now how good I am an absolute
[Amit Varma]: term is not for me to judge. But I was a quantum leap ahead of where I had been. A similar
[Amit Varma]: thing happened when I started podcasting. When people discover the scene in the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: I asked them to listen in reverse order. I didn't know what I was doing in my early episodes.
[Amit Varma]: It took a lot of time and a lot of doing to become good and a lot of thinking about my
[Amit Varma]: craft. Now the thing is, when I plunged into blogging or podcasting, I wasn't thinking
[Amit Varma]: about first principles, building frameworks and so on. These happened after the fact when
[Amit Varma]: I was well into my journey. When I teach my writing course, for example, I try to teach
[Amit Varma]: all the frameworks and principles I've learned. But I also emphasize that you have to do the
[Amit Varma]: hard yards yourself. Build reading habits, build writing habits. That's the best way
[Amit Varma]: to learn. Well, my guest today has had a similar journey to mine. He's learned what he knows
[Amit Varma]: from decades of doing it. While learning, he's built frameworks that allow him to now
[Amit Varma]: teach others how to be good at it. That's pretty much the same as me. And in this crossover
[Amit Varma]: episode today, we share our learnings with each other and with you. I hope you enjoy
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is my good friend, Deepak Chinoy. And
[Amit Varma]: this episode is a crossover episode of our podcast. This is not just a scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: It's also the Capital Mind podcast. I've known Deepak for maybe 17 or 18 years now. And my
[Amit Varma]: first impression of him was that, hey, this is such a nice guy, warm and genial, and always
[Amit Varma]: helpful. As time went by, I realized that he also had a brilliant mind, and how his
[Amit Varma]: generous nature meant that he was always willing to share his knowledge. Deepak is a financial
[Amit Varma]: genius who nailed the art of investing many years ago, and then founded Capital Mind to
[Amit Varma]: help others with his expertise. I recorded an episode with him last year, which is the
[Amit Varma]: 10th most downloaded episode of this show, in which he shared his journey and his insights
[Amit Varma]: on investing. I'll link that from the show notes. Since then, he's written a book called
[Amit Varma]: Money Wise, timeless lessons on building wealth. It's a perfect way for a newbie like me to
[Amit Varma]: learn the basics of investing. And I figured we should do an episode about it. When I invited
[Amit Varma]: him on the show, he told me that he'd also love to have me on his podcast, the Capital
[Amit Varma]: Mind podcast to talk about the creator economy, a subject I've been thinking about a lot in
[Amit Varma]: recent months. So I thought, hey, let's do a grand crossover episode. I went over to
[Amit Varma]: Bangalore and we recorded this in a swank office studio. The first quarter of the show
[Amit Varma]: is Deepak and me shooting the breeze about random stuff like growing middle aged and
[Amit Varma]: how to invest our time, not just our money. In the next quarter, it's me giving gyan on
[Amit Varma]: the creator economy. And the second half of the show is Deepak speaking about investing
[Amit Varma]: and his book. Now, even though this is a five hour episode, I felt like we couldn't cover
[Amit Varma]: so much. And I know regular listeners will complain about how short this is. Well, what
[Amit Varma]: to do? We recorded this on the day Russia invaded Ukraine. So Deepak had to deal with
[Amit Varma]: worried investors all day, which is why we couldn't talk for, say, 10 hours. This was
[Amit Varma]: also when the Jorogan controversy was at its peak, which is why we mentioned it in the
[Amit Varma]: episode, though it seems prehistoric now, because that new cycle is behind us, just
[Amit Varma]: shows you how fast new cycles move. Anyway, do listen into this episode, do buy Deepak's
[Amit Varma]: incredible book. But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees 2500
[Amit Varma]: if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Deepak, welcome to the Capital Mind Podcast.
[Guest]: And thank you Amit and welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So as we already mentioned in our respective introductions, this is a crossover episode
[Amit Varma]: and sort of a meeting of two podcasts. I won't say a meeting of two great minds because I'm
[Amit Varma]: not quite sure if I'm a great mind. But yeah, so let's you know, one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: we have in common besides our girth is that we've both sort of hit our late 40s, so to
[Amit Varma]: say. Right. And I kind of find that interesting because I think what happens over a period
[Amit Varma]: of time is, at least in my case, is that for the longest time ever, there is this period
[Amit Varma]: where you think of yourself as younger than you really are. Like when you're 20, 21, 22,
[Amit Varma]: you think of yourself as a young man, right? And that's how you think of yourself. And
[Amit Varma]: then when you get to 35 and 40 and all that, your mental image is still that you haven't
[Amit Varma]: quite adjusted. And then a moment comes where you realize that it is not exactly the case,
[Amit Varma]: right? That you are not the whippersnapper anymore, that, you know, you don't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: have more of your life in front of you than behind you. Right. And this then in some ways
[Amit Varma]: changes the way that you think about your life and the stuff that you're doing. So and
[Amit Varma]: I find that this also informs the way that I do the work that I do, which is in the creator
[Amit Varma]: economy. And I'm sure that this also informs the work that you do, especially when you
[Amit Varma]: talk about investing, especially when you, you know, in your excellent book, you talk
[Amit Varma]: about things like life insurance and retirement funds, which maybe you would not have placed
[Amit Varma]: so much stress on a long time back. So tell me, my friend, how have the years been treating
[Guest]: you and how have you changed?
[Guest]: Yeah, so, you know, I mean, we're both there. And you know, I think we've got I think of
[Guest]: this as an analogy from a different perspective. And bear with me because this goes weird.
[Guest]: When I was younger, so from the age of perhaps 14, 15, 16, I would watch a sporting tournament
[Guest]: of any sort, whether it was tennis or and say that one day, in my dreams, I become this
[Guest]: player. And I think of myself doing that. This is natural that everybody has these dreams.
[Guest]: Oh, I'll be a great cricket player, I'll go and play these things. And it was always contemporary.
[Guest]: So if I was 16, I would be Oh, when I'm 18, because I have two years more, I can practice
[Guest]: and all that stuff. And I will get there. Of course, I'd never do anything about it.
[Guest]: But the the dream was all it was great just dreaming about it. And these dreams continue.
[Guest]: So when I was 25, I would say, Oh, by 28, you can still be a great player in the tennis
[Guest]: circuit and win the Grand Slam. And when you're 35, well, you know what, Steffi Graf did it
[Guest]: when she was X and you know, somebody else did when so it was still okay. The time is
[Guest]: crossed. I think it was 42 or 43 is when I said, Okay, I can't dream this dream anymore.
[Guest]: It is not possible because you can't have a I mean, it's just physically impossible.
[Guest]: And although having never attempted it, actually, it suddenly realized that your dreams have
[Guest]: to change. And that I think was the beginning of the factor of saying listen, a lot of other
[Guest]: stuff. And, you know, there's this when you start a business, when there's always this
[Guest]: feeling of, at some point in the future, there will be a point at which some great thing
[Guest]: will happen. And that great thing could be you becoming rich or you becoming X or Y,
[Guest]: you do at some level, get this feedback from the life, your body and all of that stuff
[Guest]: that you can no longer do have those crazy dreams and they have to be achieved in a relatively
[Guest]: shorter amount of time. But increasingly, and perhaps the COVID thing is kind of changes
[Guest]: at least for me. I can't dream of doing these things in the future. I need to do it now.
[Guest]: This I think is where at least my mind has started to change saying listen, I'm 40x and
[Guest]: that 40x is closer to 50 than it is to 40. And according to my kids, at the time I reached
[Guest]: 50, I would have lived half my life. I wish they're right. But I do know that, you know,
[Guest]: that concept of every day, start every day saying this is the beginning of the rest of
[Guest]: my life, increasingly gets more desperate, saying I better live it now. Otherwise, it
[Guest]: is it's going to be so far behind that. I mean, I'm just you can't live your life thinking
[Guest]: of what is going to come and you have to live your life thinking of what you are today.
[Guest]: And this perhaps is a slight change in my mind. I don't know how it is for you. And
[Guest]: no, this is where I think you got to focus on those little things and the big things
[Guest]: all at the same time. It's a weird thing. For instance, I have my my son is in the ninth
[Guest]: standard. And he told me a few months back, Dad, after three years, I'm going to be gone
[Guest]: doing my college. And it hit me like a brick. And you know what, I knew this. It's not like
[Guest]: I didn't know this, but it hit me like a brick because three years is not a lot of time.
[Guest]: We've already spent two years into the corona. And well, three years into the no two years
[Guest]: into the corona. But we've literally I mean, it's it's now it, you know, catching distance
[Guest]: of the point where he kind of moves. So it's not just the fact that I am growing old, that
[Guest]: things are happening that should have been long term future somewhere in the I mean,
[Guest]: you know, at some point, I might get diabetes kind of thing to point with I better fix my
[Guest]: life before I get it today. It's induced a sense of urgency in my thought process, which
[Guest]: I don't think has happened before earlier. So dealing with this growing old stuff is
[Guest]: just, you know, it's mind boggling. But how is it for you? I mean, you're you're you're
[Guest]: also in that phase of life because you're you've from a career perspective, I think
[Guest]: you've gone through multiple phases of very deeply immersing yourself into different things.
[Guest]: Does it change in the late 40s?
[Amit Varma]: I think what's happened like everything you said resonated with me. And you you know,
[Amit Varma]: use that interesting phrase in terms of, you know, little things and big things, little
[Amit Varma]: dreams and big dreams. And one of the things that I've realized is that as far as the little
[Amit Varma]: things are concerned, they can be goals. But as far as the big things are concerned, there
[Amit Varma]: should be processes in the sense that you know, when you're young, you have all these
[Amit Varma]: goals, I'll do this, I'll do that x, y, z, I'll write so many books, blah, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: you have all those goals. And those goals are further tied into, you know, after I do
[Amit Varma]: the book, this is how successful it will be, or whatever it is. And I think you reach a
[Amit Varma]: stage in life where you realize that one, those goals are probably not going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: Two, that's not necessarily a bad thing, because those goals are very often tied into something
[Amit Varma]: you should not have been chasing in the first place, which is a validation of others, you
[Amit Varma]: know, which is why you don't just think I'll write a good book, you think I'll write a
[Amit Varma]: good book that wins an award or becomes a bestseller. Right. And I think like, if there
[Amit Varma]: is one realization that I want to keep with me every moment, it's that universal human
[Amit Varma]: anxiety of what other people think of you, you got to let that go. And you got to realize
[Amit Varma]: that no one is thinking of you, you know, everyone's got their heads up their own ass,
[Amit Varma]: everyone's obsessed with themselves. So it doesn't matter that that you know, universal
[Amit Varma]: anxiety, which is there is false. You also have to redefine what you mean by happiness.
[Amit Varma]: And here's the thing, it is not a fixed thing that x will make me happy, and y will not.
[Amit Varma]: What makes you happy is you decide what makes you happy, it's your state of mind. Right?
[Amit Varma]: So now, do I want my happiness to be dependent on achieving some random thing which is not
[Amit Varma]: in my control? Or do I want to sit back and say, let me enjoy the small joys? Right? So
[Amit Varma]: what I try to do rather, and those small joys can be goals, those small joys could be that
[Amit Varma]: you'll get me a nice steak for lunch, for example, which itself is a small joy, right?
[Amit Varma]: And, and that can be a goal. But otherwise, it should more be processes that there are
[Amit Varma]: things I like doing. For example, these days, when I think of the scene and the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: I do not think that I will do a kick ass episode that will get x downloads or whatever, or
[Amit Varma]: so many retweets or whatever. I just think that I'll have a great conversation, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that I'll just sit with a friend, and I'll have a great conversation. And my joy in the
[Amit Varma]: conversation we are having right now, is not dependent on the final product, that this
[Amit Varma]: will be a conversation everybody will appreciate. It is the it is it comes from the fact that
[Amit Varma]: I can sit across the table with an old friend, and I'm listening to him, and he's listening
[Amit Varma]: to me, and we are both comfortable. And we are at a stage where we don't need to impress
[Amit Varma]: each other or think about you know, all that shit is out of the window. There's no posturing
[Amit Varma]: anymore. You know, you kind of what you are. So I'm giving this as an example of a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a small joy. And I've realized that it is the small joys we should focus on except
[Amit Varma]: that my lament still is that I am not mindful enough. And I also realized that all the goals
[Amit Varma]: that I wanted to achieve and haven't achieved, they are still within my reach, except that
[Amit Varma]: it's a mistake to keep those goals in mind. If you just build the processes, those goals
[Amit Varma]: will happen. Like I tell myself that, okay, all these years, you know, I mean, it's been
[Amit Varma]: interesting. I've five years, I was a professional poker player. And I kind of rambled around
[Amit Varma]: and did other things for a while. So I, the regret I have is I could have written 9-10
[Amit Varma]: books by now. I haven't. But the reason I haven't is that I didn't put the process in
[Amit Varma]: place. The reason that didn't happen is I didn't have the writing habit where I sit
[Amit Varma]: down every day, write for a number of hours, where I build the mindfulness where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: your mind doesn't wander all the time. You know, I didn't build a discipline that when
[Amit Varma]: I'm bored, instead of reaching for my smartphone, I reach for a book, maybe your book. So I
[Amit Varma]: didn't kind of build all that. So I think what I have sort of realized and when I teach
[Amit Varma]: my writing course, for example, my fourth webinar is just about process. And my point
[Amit Varma]: there is that listen, you know, we can, we can master the craft at an intellectual level,
[Amit Varma]: we can know what is a perfect sentence, how we are building rhythm, all that shit. But
[Amit Varma]: if you don't actually get your ass on the chair and actually get it done, it's no good.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and when I teach my course, I often think that I wish I had, you know,
[Amit Varma]: done such a course in my early 20s, I would have learned so much. But the biggest learning
[Amit Varma]: that I would have had is from sort of the process aspect. So in a sense, as far as my
[Amit Varma]: personal life is concerned, and I've been very lucky also to be part of the creator
[Amit Varma]: economy. And that's given me satisfaction. Like earlier for me, the satisfaction of creating
[Amit Varma]: was in creating, you know, and that I think has to be a core satisfaction. But we've reached
[Amit Varma]: a stage where you can see that you can be, you know, which we'll discuss, you can be
[Amit Varma]: independent of a lot of the constraints that otherwise constrain creators. So all of that
[Amit Varma]: is great. Like every morning, when I wake up, I can easily, you know, look around me
[Amit Varma]: and say, fuck, I'm so lucky to have this or so lucky to have that and whatever. And it's
[Amit Varma]: not even a big deal. It's not like but that stuff is there that, you know, and obviously
[Amit Varma]: we are human. We still, you know, we still think of goals. We still say ki haan yeh karna
[Amit Varma]: hai, wo karna hai and all of that. I was interested in your sort of your sporting daydreams because
[Amit Varma]: I think my mind has this default mode where it goes into Walter Mitty or like Mungheri
[Amit Varma]: Lal ke Haseen Sapne kind of mode and all that. Does that happen to you also?
[Guest]: All the time. In fact, every single thing that you think about that says, okay, well,
[Guest]: I want to do this. It becomes that Mungheri Lal ke Haseen Sapne, what happens if I did
[Guest]: that? And then for instance, if I found a cure to cancer, you know, then what happens?
[Guest]: How am I going to deal with the fame and this thing of it? Will I give it away for free?
[Guest]: I mean, this is this is nonsense because I'm not going to discover the cure to cancer in
[Guest]: all probability. But if I did, it's just nice to think about it, right? Because like you're
[Guest]: building a world of your own. And in that created world, you're kind of exploring things
[Guest]: that otherwise would be nonsense if you ever try to do this on stage. The fact that I can
[Guest]: talk about it openly is also a symptom of my age and perhaps the creator economy where
[Guest]: such a view would not be considered out of place. Perhaps 10 years ago, if I made such
[Guest]: statements, it would be like Deepak, you're just so full of yourself. It's just honesty,
[Guest]: but it's all of us are full of ourselves. And I just introduced my children to the Truman
[Guest]: Show. You know, so there was a point in my life where I thought the whole world actually
[Guest]: plotted to revolve around me. I think all of us have that at some point in our lives.
[Guest]: But the Truman Show was a manifestation of it. And, you know, he makes a statement that
[Guest]: I'm this is going to be part of my like, letter to, you know, on the blog and on to our this
[Guest]: thing itself. But he says, you accept the reality with which you are presented. And
[Guest]: I think that is a clean, clear statement that is so true when you're older. Because now
[Guest]: you've seen life in so many different vantage through so many different vantage points,
[Guest]: that you suddenly realize that my, you know, my outrage, my emotion, my thought process,
[Guest]: very few, little of it is a function of itself. So there was moments of grief in my life,
[Guest]: where it was grief. But there were moments of grief where it was induced by the narrative
[Guest]: of what was shown to me. And it has never been more obvious to me than it was today.
[Guest]: So when they say, you know, you're young, you're, you're probably leftist in thought
[Guest]: process, that the world should be equal and all that stuff. And as you grow older, you
[Guest]: become this writer, because you see all these different things. And you say that stuff doesn't
[Guest]: work. And this stuff also doesn't work. But the reality is somewhere in the middle. And
[Guest]: we're happy to be in those gray areas. I think that the fact is that every outrageous
[Guest]: act no longer outrages you anymore, because you're looking at the motivations behind it,
[Guest]: and saying, listen, I don't have to react to it the same way that the listener want
[Guest]: or the speaker wants me to react to it, simply because I know they're pointing us out in
[Guest]: a certain direction. I mean, this is whether you call this certain TV channels where there
[Guest]: is a sun sunny kind of thing, or whether it is a news that is innocuously misleading.
[Guest]: It may be anything, it may be a commentator in like, I mean, Formula One recently, there
[Guest]: was a there was a big issue with the last race. In the last race, the race director
[Guest]: changed or interpreted the rules for his own sake. And to a person who's watched it for
[Guest]: a while, it's not that that particular event was the problem. There was a history to it.
[Guest]: There's a fact that Hamilton's been winning. There's a fact that people had been getting
[Guest]: those boredom and such. You to have a final race that is exciting has not happened for
[Guest]: like 10 years, you take that history in context, you can see why he made the decisions he did.
[Guest]: But if you take it from the rulebook context, he was wrong. So it's very interesting because
[Guest]: he brought more popularity to the game by that one act, then the fact that he was censured
[Guest]: for it, and banned or whatever, he's been taken out of it and all that stuff. But it
[Guest]: made the game made it made it exciting, which is what the whole game is designed to. Otherwise,
[Guest]: what's the point was watching cars go at 300 kilometers per hour. It's exciting because
[Guest]: there is some excitement in it and the commentary and all of this. But this is, this is where
[Guest]: you realize that I would have never thought of this when I was younger, I would have made
[Guest]: up stance saying he was wrong. And now I'm sitting there saying, dude, you know what,
[Guest]: there's a bunch of things to it. And in the Truman show, there was a there was a particular
[Guest]: piece of time when they had to cut the transmission of this 10,000 hours of continuous transmission
[Guest]: and suddenly they had to cut it. And there was an empty screen. And one guy comes in
[Guest]: and says, you know, the sponsors are threatening to cut that. And the director of this whole
[Guest]: thing, he says, well, we've never had so many views of a blank screen of the actual show
[Guest]: as we have of this blank screen going on right now. So it's true, right? Because you're you're
[Guest]: the reason you're you're generating that excitement is now is considered bad in all traditional
[Guest]: aspects. But you're getting exactly what you wanted out of it was viewership, sponsorship,
[Guest]: recognition, fame, whatever it is. So maybe this growing old is just earlier, I would
[Guest]: be like, that is wrong. Why? Why should that be the case? Now I'm like, no, maybe the process
[Guest]: is the objective. The goal is not the objective. How I got there is what I wanted to achieve.
[Guest]: Whether I get there or not is irrelevant. If I got my fame from not doing something,
[Guest]: then from doing something, and the fame is what I wanted in the first place. So there
[Guest]: we are. And it's very interesting. I'll probably segue into different contexts in this in finance
[Guest]: itself. I have a very clear thought process over here, which is in finance, it is not
[Guest]: the person who makes the highest returns that wins. Warren Buffett hasn't made great returns
[Guest]: for the last 15 years. And he's still winning yet. And he's winning because, you know, people
[Guest]: aren't, you know, selling his company or telling them that they need to replace this guy because
[Guest]: he's not making great returns. They're still quoting anything that he says, they still
[Guest]: go to him every time there's a crisis. The point is, he's done this without focusing
[Guest]: on the one thing that everybody wants to focus on, which is can I make 10 rupees 20 rupees
[Guest]: can I make 10 rupees 25 rupees? If I made it 25, am I better than the guy who made it
[Guest]: 20? The answer is no. It's the guy whose embodiment of how he got there, which makes it exciting,
[Guest]: he can make 10 rupees 12 rupees and he might still be more valuable as an as a person than
[Guest]: the person who made 20 or 25. As you grow older, I think the stark realization that
[Guest]: it's the it's the journey and not the destination. To me at least, I mean, it was a it was a
[Guest]: proverb earlier, enjoy the journey. And now it's like, it's hitting you on the face. It's
[Guest]: like, dude, this is it. This is what you are. Your journey is who you are, where you get
[Guest]: from here. Even if you got into a lot of money or a lot of whatever, is just a byproduct
[Guest]: of whatever you did to get there. So, although this is a very long segue from where we are.
[Guest]: And what are your thoughts? I mean, do you do you feel now that you would focus a lot
[Guest]: more on the journey? Like you said, the conversations, the fact that they give you those little joys
[Guest]: than just the destination, which is, I mean, I don't know what the destination is anymore.
[Guest]: It's like, I got somewhere and suddenly it became all hazy, right? I wrote a book, I
[Guest]: want to write 10 more books, because I feel I've not written enough. And then I feel I've
[Guest]: written too much in certain cases. What was the song? I forget. The one in which he says,
[Guest]: I haven't said enough. I've said too much. And then I haven't said enough. So, I mean,
[Guest]: at the time, you would never understand what the lyric meant. Suddenly at 47, I'm like,
[Amit Varma]: okay, I know what that means. That's a very with or without you sentiment. I think this
[Amit Varma]: whole thing about journey and destination ties into process and goals, right? That for
[Amit Varma]: me, the journey is really the process and the goals take care of themselves. But to
[Amit Varma]: double click on a couple of things you mentioned, one, the way I would view that Formula One
[Amit Varma]: differently than you is I would just think that, okay, Hamilton and Max, whatever his
[Amit Varma]: name is, and they're both going to die, the cars are both going to be scrap, you know,
[Amit Varma]: eventually in the longer scheme of things, the longer that you look at it, so who cares.
[Amit Varma]: So sometimes I kind of feel like that, but you want to enjoy the ride in the moment.
[Amit Varma]: I also want to and by the way, that quote, which you referred to about I think it goes
[Amit Varma]: to the effect of, if you're not a socialist at 18, you don't have a heart. If you're not
[Amit Varma]: a capitalist at 25, you don't have a brain, which is resonant. And I think both of us
[Amit Varma]: would kind of agree with that. But I want to double back on what you said about being
[Amit Varma]: full of ourselves, you know, what some people might say. And I think here's the deal. Number
[Amit Varma]: one, I think it's important as both of us would I think have the self reflection to
[Amit Varma]: say that, you know, that there is no such thing called an adult in that sense of somebody
[Amit Varma]: who has figured everything out, you know, so it's a little bit of posturing when you
[Amit Varma]: act with that certain kind of like, you spoke about your Mungheri Lal moments, and I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: I have them as well. And we are both in a sense complex messes, except that we learn
[Amit Varma]: to kind of control the complexity and think about it a bit more. And I think one of the
[Amit Varma]: important padaavs to, I don't know why I thought of that term from Kaun Banega Crorepati, but
[Amit Varma]: one of the important padaavs that we have to kind of get past is to just stop posturing
[Amit Varma]: at some points in time. We spend too much of our life posturing to others and even posturing
[Amit Varma]: to ourselves about what kind of person we are. And I think maybe a time comes where
[Amit Varma]: you give a little bit more to self reflection. And you stop a little bit of the posturing
[Amit Varma]: and you get a little more comfortable in your own skin. This is who I am. If there is a
[Amit Varma]: word T-H-A-T, I can only pronounce it as that, right? And I don't care if, you know, I don't
[Amit Varma]: even want to consciously try too hard to correct it, because this is who I am. I'm happy kind
[Amit Varma]: of being authentic. You are happy kind of being authentic. And I think one of the big
[Amit Varma]: secrets of the creator economy really, and one of the things that I stress upon when
[Amit Varma]: I speak to young creators, is that just be true to yourself, be authentic to yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Because that is the only thing you have that sort of, you know, sets you apart from everyone
[Amit Varma]: else. So, so yeah, that's, that's kind of
[Guest]: interesting that you bring that up, because the creator economy is a lot about authenticity,
[Guest]: right? So in the sense of, I think you and I've heard you walk us through a presentation
[Guest]: of how to think about the creator economy. And it's interesting here, because this authenticity
[Guest]: angle was always something that was shied, people told me that don't do it, don't be
[Guest]: authentic, because there is this formal prose that you have to follow, certain things have
[Guest]: to be in the passive voice, certain things have to be in the active voice, there is,
[Guest]: you should have, you should start a sentence with Dear Sir, or whatever, it's like, it's
[Guest]: like a set of rules that you have to follow. Which is why even today, when we when when
[Guest]: I get, let's say, people who want to write for Capital Mind, they send us the stuff,
[Guest]: it looks like this is manufactured from a textbook. And then I'm like, no, no, you
[Guest]: don't want people and I feel lousy saying this. But I have to tell people unlearn the
[Guest]: textbook writing process and move to. So what is it about the creator economy that has changed
[Guest]: this whole thing? And, you know, you've seen this, I mean, you've you've been you India
[Guest]: uncut was one of the most popular blogs. And I think that's when I first came in touch,
[Guest]: we got in touch. That's where I met. I was also blogging at the time. And so I was talking
[Guest]: money, you're talking so many other things. And then we saw the IPM fiasco at that time.
[Guest]: And then onwards to that. It's a very interesting time, because I think India uncut was very
[Guest]: refreshing because it was from the heart. It was like if I read Amit Verma in a magazine,
[Guest]: they would somehow take you and put a suit on you. And you know, they would edit out
[Guest]: the aspects that were you. So that it fit into this, say, business standard or whatever
[Guest]: it was, I would think that I would like it's like, it's like when you write for one of
[Guest]: these newspaper type things, you had to change your thought process, but or change your writing
[Guest]: process. But on India uncut, I could see you as Amit Verma. It to me that was important,
[Guest]: but suddenly it's become important to the whole world. It's not just me, it's the I
[Guest]: mean, when I was when we were doing this, there was a small clique of people blogging.
[Guest]: And we had a reasonable, I think, thought process on fan club. What's changed from that
[Guest]: early blogging media to maybe the creator economy, as you've seen?
[Amit Varma]: So a number of things that I'm happy to kind of take you in detail, like I did in the presentation
[Amit Varma]: through all the various phases and all the things that have changed, but about the intimate
[Amit Varma]: economy, what I call the intimate creator economy. Here's the thing. When we are consuming
[Amit Varma]: content, when you're consuming art or consuming entertainment in the 70s or 80s, the stars
[Amit Varma]: you admire are larger than life, right? They are not your friends, they are larger than
[Amit Varma]: life they're up there, you're building temples for Amitabh Bachchan and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: That is, yeah, that is kind of what it is. And that's come a full circle today, where
[Amit Varma]: a podcaster, like podcasters like you and me are a voice in somebody's head. So when
[Amit Varma]: I listen to a podcast that I love, maybe by Bass Roberts or Tyler Cowen or whatever, somebody's
[Amit Varma]: voice in my head, it feels like an intimate connection. Let me sort of draw a metaphor
[Amit Varma]: I've spoken about before, to sort of illustrate that. Let's say, let's look at the audiovisual
[Amit Varma]: medium, right? Let's say you go to watch a movie in a theatre, there's a certain distance
[Amit Varma]: between you and the screen, right? And there's a similar distance between the camera and
[Amit Varma]: the actors. So you'll have your grand western and there is that distance and there is that
[Amit Varma]: scale. Now, when you watch something in a television, the TV screen is a couple of meters
[Amit Varma]: away from you. And the camera is that much distance away from the actor. So you have
[Amit Varma]: friends in Seinfeld and those kind of indoor settings, five, six people, that's, that's
[Amit Varma]: what you get. If you're watching something on your laptop, it's, you know, it's less
[Amit Varma]: than a meter. And a lot of made for YouTube content is like that. It's much closer. Now,
[Amit Varma]: where I look at it in terms of audio, and why I always say that podcasting is very different
[Amit Varma]: from radio, it's not radio on demand. The reason is that radio is more like television.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of broadcasting. I think of radio as you're driving in your car with four other
[Amit Varma]: people in a radio speaking to all of you, it is playing on the speaker, just as a kind
[Amit Varma]: of a metaphor, in the sense that because of all kinds of imperatives and incentives, in
[Amit Varma]: India, for example, there'll be the high license fees and all of that. They don't have a choice
[Amit Varma]: but to go wide and not to go too deep. As our mutual friend Trane Panicker says, you
[Amit Varma]: are a mile wide and an inch deep, right? I love that phrase. And that's kind of what
[Amit Varma]: radio is. Now in some places you like, I believe New York has some 70-80 FM stations and it's
[Amit Varma]: a different whatever, but even there, there's only so far you can go. In India, you've just
[Amit Varma]: got to play your Bollywood music and be very mainstream and you can't approach any niche.
[Amit Varma]: Now podcasting is the most intimate thing of all. It's a voice in your head. And people
[Amit Varma]: listening to me know this, like the kind of love I've got from my listeners. It makes
[Amit Varma]: me tear up, right? You feel the connection, how deep it is. And I feel that way for podcasters
[Amit Varma]: I listen to, or, you know, even people whose vlogs I watch these days on YouTube, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you feel like you, you know, this person is your friend, you're worried that if you come
[Amit Varma]: across him in the mall, you'll just slap him on the back and say, hey, how's your, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how's your cold now? Are you better? That kind of thing. And this changes the way
[Amit Varma]: that you approach your content then, because if you're on radio, you are kind of broadcasting,
[Amit Varma]: you have a certain kind of voice, a certain kind of, you know, like Ameen Sayani will
[Amit Varma]: speak in the Ameen Sayani way and he's beautiful and charming and it's lovely, but he belongs
[Amit Varma]: to everyone. He doesn't belong to you alone. Right? And so people will ask me things while
[Amit Varma]: podcasting that, you know, do I need to do voice modulation course and all of that and
[Amit Varma]: all that nonsense. And I say, no, all you need to do is you need to talk normally, like
[Amit Varma]: yourself, like the way we are talking to each other is the way we talk to each other, right?
[Amit Varma]: There's, you know, just making sure we avoid cuss words, but that's pretty much, in my
[Amit Varma]: case, not even that, frankly, but that's pretty much what it is. And that's what listeners
[Amit Varma]: love that you are who you are, they feel like they know you, there's a straightforwardness
[Amit Varma]: to it. And especially if you're not pretending, if you're not posturing, because over a period
[Amit Varma]: of time, you can't fake it, you are who you are. Like, I used to watch Big Boss a lot
[Amit Varma]: back in the day. I think I even I was kind of tweeting about like almost live tweeting
[Amit Varma]: about it in 2008, 2009, whatever, you know, I just found it fascinating. And the thing
[Amit Varma]: is, they know there's a camera, right? But they know there's a camera for a little while,
[Amit Varma]: but then they lapse. And then they are who they are. You are who you are and your personality
[Amit Varma]: expresses itself. So you can't fake it too much. You know, especially when you do a podcast
[Amit Varma]: over a period of time like I have when I'm following my curiosities. I think people appreciate
[Amit Varma]: that I might say something in one episode and 10 episodes later, I might say I was wrong
[Amit Varma]: there or this is how my views have evolved, and so on and so forth. You know, and I think
[Amit Varma]: that that's a massive feature. Now, as far as the people who, for example, come to you
[Amit Varma]: and they sound like a textbook, one of the pieces of advice I give in my writing course
[Amit Varma]: is, and it's really standard, it's not like a new insight from me, is that read out everything
[Amit Varma]: you have written. If it sounds like something you would say, then that's fine. If it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: sound like something you would say, you know, like, for example, after due consideration,
[Amit Varma]: we have whatever you we don't talk like that, right? So then, if it then it is contrived,
[Amit Varma]: and it will sound contrived to the reader also. And because they're not used to it,
[Amit Varma]: they'll have to work that much harder to process it. And all good writers get this. Like a
[Amit Varma]: classic example I give, which is a great example in across so many domains is Bob Dylan's blowing
[Amit Varma]: in the wind, right? So your key line there is the answer my friend is blowing in the
[Amit Varma]: wind. You could also instead of saying the answer my friend is blowing in the wind, you
[Amit Varma]: could have said the response comrade is wafting in the breeze. Right? Now, why is that bad?
[Amit Varma]: That is bad because answer is a word we will use when we are speaking not response. And
[Amit Varma]: we will say my friend, we won't say comrade unless we are from whatever particular, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, or the CPIM somewhere, but and we won't say wafting in the breeze, we'll say blowing
[Amit Varma]: in the wind. It's really natural language like in one of my webinars, I talk a lot about
[Amit Varma]: Shakespeare, whose language seems so archaic to us today, but it was a common speech of
[Amit Varma]: his day. You know, if you look at how many words Shakespeare used that are more than
[Amit Varma]: two syllables, there are very few, he's using the common language of the day, he's creating
[Amit Varma]: great art, which at the same time, makes him a box office superstar. He was a Spielberg
[Amit Varma]: plus Yash Chopra of his time. So I think that this just this one piece of advice to anyone
[Amit Varma]: who's writing that read out what you have written. Does it sound like because you know,
[Amit Varma]: Deepak, we know a lot of writer friends in common, right? Devangshu Dutta, Nilanjanaroy,
[Amit Varma]: all of these people, Salil Tripathi, you know, whenever we read whenever I read anything
[Guest]: by them, I can hear it in their voice. Yes, it's like they're talking. It's like they're
[Amit Varma]: talking because it's natural to them. Because they're not trying too hard. They're not trying
[Amit Varma]: to be too writerly or verbose or so many people will read this, I have to do something special
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. They're just kind of being themselves. And of course, they're not making
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the mistakes that we make in our speech, like I'll say very and I'll put adverbs
[Amit Varma]: and I'll do um and ah and all of that because when we are talking, there's no filter. But
[Amit Varma]: when you're sort of so you know, an old editor of mine Tim Delisle, once who wrote this great
[Amit Varma]: book I'd recommend to all my listeners called the Cornell guide to how to write well, it's
[Amit Varma]: on Kindle unlimited, you can read it in a couple of hours. He once said that good writing
[Amit Varma]: is like enhanced conversation. So it's like, you know, that old phrase goes right as you
[Amit Varma]: speak, people misunderstand it. They think it means that the way you're speaking, you
[Amit Varma]: just write like that. That's not what it means. Because if you did that, you'd be reproducing
[Amit Varma]: all the you know, the mistakes we make while speaking because we don't have a filter. So
[Amit Varma]: the ums and the ahs and the run on sentences or whatever. No, it's that it's enhanced conversation.
[Amit Varma]: But right as you speak means that when you write something and you when you say it out,
[Amit Varma]: it should sound like it's you. And therefore that textbook thing goes away. If you just
[Amit Varma]: you know, that textbook thing completely kind of goes away. And this is and this is something
[Amit Varma]: I see in streams as well in the vlogs I watch, that people are just being themselves and
[Amit Varma]: there is a charm to that. You know, creators today should not think that, oh my god, you
[Amit Varma]: know, like, I occasionally teach this podcasting course, I do like two cohorts a year, unlike
[Amit Varma]: my monthly writing course. And people will sometimes ask that, you know, what is my USP?
[Amit Varma]: Like, should I even do it? Or what makes me special? I'm not a domain expert in anything.
[Amit Varma]: And my point always is that, boss, you just have to be you, because you are on a journey,
[Amit Varma]: which many other people share, intellectual journey, journey through life, they are at
[Amit Varma]: different points of it. Some may even be ahead of you. But the fact that you are on that
[Amit Varma]: journey immediately makes them empathize and makes them curious and makes that connection
[Amit Varma]: happen. And here's the other thing, which feeds into something we were talking about
[Amit Varma]: earlier, where I lamented the lack of mindfulness. Now I did a recent episode with the writer
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh Kumar, which I just loved. And one of the things we discussed was how writing
[Amit Varma]: every day, not only enriches your appreciation of life, because the act of writing every
[Amit Varma]: day means you're sitting down, you're thinking about something that would otherwise just
[Amit Varma]: have passed, and you're capturing it, it also changes a little bit of you. That every day
[Amit Varma]: with whatever you write in a day, it can be a couple of hundred words a day, you are sitting
[Amit Varma]: down in a quiet space. And, you know, get thinking about something that is kind of improving
[Amit Varma]: you. And there, I think lies the magic that maybe I'm on a journey of trying to figure
[Amit Varma]: something out, maybe trying to figure my society out or whatever. Now, I need not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: be smarter or more knowledgeable than anyone listening to me. But the very fact that there
[Amit Varma]: is that moment of examination, where I am sitting down and thinking about something
[Amit Varma]: is something that others can share in. And then they can think with me and they can feel
[Amit Varma]: part of the process. So which is and just an anecdote about this whole intimacy thing
[Amit Varma]: that I did an episode with Abhinandan Sekri where we spoke for four hours when I went
[Amit Varma]: to Delhi. One listener wrote in to me to say that I felt so much like I'm sitting with
[Amit Varma]: two friends in a living room, that at one point I interrupted you before I realized
[Amit Varma]: that I'm not there. Right. And I was so touched by this. You know, and I can only hope that
[Guest]: people listening to us right now feel that way as well.
[Guest]: No, no, it's, it's so true. Because sometimes in a conversation, that is the ultimate, right?
[Guest]: Because you're, you know, that you're in there, and you're speaking. And so I often think
[Guest]: about this. If in a podcast, and I almost force the user to stop there and say, hang
[Guest]: on, I have a point that I want to make over here. That is when you know that you've touched
[Guest]: the soul of the person who's on the other side. I don't know if people do it. I mean,
[Guest]: nobody tells me like somebody has actually told you about this, which is like awesome.
[Guest]: But I think that is the ultimate if I saw someone listening to my podcast, pause the
[Guest]: podcast and say shit, you know what, this just triggered this thought in my mind that
[Guest]: I have to kind of get out right now because it's there. It's part of the conversation
[Guest]: that we're in on right now. And the realization that you can't because but so it's, it's,
[Guest]: it's something that says you achieved something in that podcast. Or in the it's like, if you're
[Guest]: having a conversation with someone, and there's one line that strikes you, and you take that
[Guest]: away, and you will never forget that line, it may not make any sense for you to remember
[Guest]: the context in which that conversation actually happened. But the fact that that line impacted
[Guest]: you or something impacted you so deeply, is part of you know, your learning process and
[Guest]: your joys and, and the fact that that conversation left you a little bit, you know, higher in
[Guest]: dopamine levels or, you know, the thought process levels. This is, maybe this is just
[Guest]: again, part of growing old, that you enjoy this a lot more than you enjoy partying and
[Guest]: doing all the other stuff that, you know, perhaps you enjoy more as a kid. But this
[Guest]: is the part where I think that that intimacy thing matters, and matters deeply in the sense
[Guest]: that without it today, I feel like you're watching a news broadcast where somebody is
[Guest]: just reading out from a teleprompter with no emotion other than where do I put the pause.
[Guest]: So you know, and another point of what you just mentioned, which was, don't speak as
[Guest]: you are speaking, I found that often I violated that construct. So for instance, I use a phrase
[Guest]: called Abhayar and I use this Abhayar in my writing. I saw that and I found it charming.
[Guest]: It was interesting because I was like, if someone put this question to me, I'd say Abhayar
[Guest]: wait, this is not how this thing does. Instead of me, in a normal point, I would edit out
[Guest]: the Abhayar wait and then tell you exactly what follows with that, right. But putting
[Guest]: the Abhayar wait in the writing is somehow more appealing to the reader because he's
[Guest]: almost like, okay, this is what he's trying to say, he's saying, you know, hold off. And
[Guest]: for some strange reason, it works. I mean, it works at least for a few people who read
[Guest]: what I have to write. But it's very interesting in that it works from an aspect of violating
[Guest]: that very rule, which was a rule in my own head saying, you know, remove the, I should
[Guest]: go to this Toastmasters thing. There was this R counter concept, there's a person who counts
[Guest]: the number of errs and ahs and ums in the business, and you're supposed to reduce your
[Guest]: R count over time. I'm like, no, in writing, you can have a little bit of an R count.
[Amit Varma]: I think where it comes in is that that's a voice. If your voice is Abhayar, like in your
[Amit Varma]: book, there are these moments of humor, which like I can't recall one offhand, but there
[Amit Varma]: are these moments of humor in different places. I'm like, this is a typical Deepak Joke. Typical,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and I'm sure you know what I'm talking about. But there are a whole bunch of those.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very charming, because I know you, but even if I didn't know you, I would I would
[Amit Varma]: know you a little better, just by seeing that and there you're being true to yourself. See,
[Amit Varma]: I think one core point is this, and why this kind of content appeals to both of us, and
[Amit Varma]: to so many people is that we live in a constructed world. Okay, everything is constructed. Like
[Amit Varma]: you said, TV pay, things are being presented in a particular way. Radio pay, things are
[Amit Varma]: being everywhere, things are being presented in a particular way. Social media is nothing
[Amit Varma]: but people posturing and, you know, I am so virtuous, or I am so sanskari or whatever
[Amit Varma]: shit it is, right? And where are the real connections? Right? And it is not true that
[Amit Varma]: we are happy to be in this constructed world and all of that nonsense. I think people at
[Amit Varma]: some level, crave those real connections, where, for example, when they listen to me
[Amit Varma]: talking to a guest, maybe that, you know, sometimes we will have different point of
[Amit Varma]: views and we'll, you know, discuss them in a civil way. But sometimes we won't be sure.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also okay, because certainty is constructed when you come across it. Right?
[Amit Varma]: So we are recording with all this Russia, Ukraine thing. And so much of the commentary
[Amit Varma]: about it is going to be random people giving random gyan in hindsight, right? And constructing
[Amit Varma]: narratives. I think, you know, I did an episode with Rukmini, the data journalist, and she
[Amit Varma]: told me about this TV program she was watching at the time of some election, I think the
[Amit Varma]: last UP election or whatever, where at one point, they had the wrong result. So then
[Amit Varma]: all the experts started giving gyan on the wrong result that you see, this is what has
[Amit Varma]: happened. And this has been mobilized and that has been mobilized. And then suddenly
[Amit Varma]: they realized that the result is the other thing and has gone the other way. And the
[Amit Varma]: same experts are giving gyan, you see, this is not hard to figure out this is the dynamic
[Amit Varma]: here and all of that bullshit, right? And it is that constructed world. It is that artifice
[Amit Varma]: that I think, you know, many of us, even if everybody has a bullshit detector, you may
[Amit Varma]: not specifically know that what so and so is saying is bullshit, because you may not
[Amit Varma]: know that domain. But you have a sense boss, you know, and then when you you have people
[Amit Varma]: who are not trying to construct anything like you and I, we're not trying to present a point
[Amit Varma]: of view or present this or whatever, you know, and there is a charm to that, which is why
[Amit Varma]: you know, very early on, I remember, someone sent me some advice that, you know, your show
[Amit Varma]: should be much crisper, you should make them 10 minutes, you divide it into point wise
[Amit Varma]: format and all that. And I was like, boss, I'm not doing an explainer. I understand the
[Amit Varma]: value of an explainer, you know, and the person who sent me this advice, by the way, went
[Amit Varma]: on to YouTube and does really good explainer. So credit to him, you know, but I was doing
[Amit Varma]: something different. And there's just a lot of value to that for me. And these are just
[Amit Varma]: such, you know, in a sense, like, I wonder what you feel about this. But I think both
[Amit Varma]: you and I, in a sense, are really lucky to be alive. And this old at this precise time,
[Amit Varma]: because you think about it, we were born in the mid 70s, broadly, right. And we have grown
[Amit Varma]: up in a sense in an analog world, right. And we've grown up in an analog world. And we
[Amit Varma]: have had one kind of education where you read every book you get your hands on, because
[Amit Varma]: books are scarce, you put put together a mixtape of music that you like, it is so special,
[Amit Varma]: you're trying to woo someone, you make a mixtape for them. It is a big freaking deal, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's it's it's, you know, when you write when you communicate with other people, when you
[Amit Varma]: write letters to them, you write long letters, you actually sit down and you put a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of yourself into each letter you write, and it's not all functional. And then we come
[Amit Varma]: into the internet, when we are adults, and the whole world is kind of opened up for us.
[Amit Varma]: And then we have a second education. And this is like another layer that is happening. And
[Amit Varma]: the result is that where we are sitting, we've had these multiple educations, we've been
[Amit Varma]: enterprising enough to kind of go with the different flows that we've gone with, but
[Amit Varma]: we don't take it for granted. Like, I think people born, say, in 1995, will take some
[Amit Varma]: of it for granted. And they may not even have experienced that heraf. They may not have
[Amit Varma]: experienced boredom. What is the value of boredom? You know, does a kid who always has
[Amit Varma]: a smartphone with her? And and there, you know, does she know that what it is for the
[Amit Varma]: mind to be that empty space where it can just wander, and it can think about stuff. And
[Amit Varma]: in that thinking, you also, you know, find things about yourself. Like one cliche that
[Amit Varma]: I keep, I say cliche, because I keep coming back to it. It's not a cliche. It's a great
[Amit Varma]: insight by Jonathan Hyatt, where he says that, sure, we have the internet and all of history
[Amit Varma]: available to us. But everybody is consuming something that was made in the last three
[Amit Varma]: days. Wow. Right. Wow. I want to find ways to break past that in my own life, I'm a victim.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a lament about others. It's a it's a sort of complaint about myself to myself,
[Amit Varma]: that too often, I'm like kind of sitting there and instead of reading a book, I'll go online
[Amit Varma]: and I'll, you know, I'll go to sites, I'll play a little online chess and get my dopamine
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And I'll just do a bunch of different things. But I am going from moment
[Amit Varma]: to moment from shallow moment to shallow moment to shallow moment to shallow moment. And I
[Amit Varma]: think all of us, you know, everybody who's listening to this, also, I know you agree
[Amit Varma]: with me, this is like a common struggle, that how do we get past this, because you almost
[Amit Varma]: feel trapped. Like I played poker professionally for a few years, right? So I, it's one of
[Amit Varma]: the things I looked into, like the first time I went to Goa, right. And I went to Goa for
[Amit Varma]: three, four years without seeing a beach. Because I would just, you know, go to Panjim,
[Amit Varma]: break into whatever hotel I'm in. And then I'd go to my offshore casino, which in those
[Amit Varma]: days was Casino Royale. And there was another one called Pride. And over there, what a casino
[Amit Varma]: does is that there are no windows. So you don't know, you don't have daylight or anything,
[Amit Varma]: there are no clocks, they pump in oxygenated air to keep you fresh for long periods of
[Amit Varma]: time. And so I remember once I started playing at two o'clock, and I thought, oh, it must
[Amit Varma]: be four o'clock after a while of playing and I found it's nine o'clock, you have no sense
[Amit Varma]: of time, time just passes, they want to keep people fresh and gambling, right? And I would
[Amit Varma]: of course, play the one game there that is a game of skill, everything else you're playing
[Amit Varma]: against the house. And I kind of studied that a bit, bought a couple of books on that which
[Amit Varma]: are linked from the show notes. And from the 70s, 80s, 90s onwards, there is a science
[Amit Varma]: about how to get people addicted, how to keep people addicted, to the extent that the noises
[Amit Varma]: and the music that a slot machine makes is all particularly designed to trigger the brain
[Amit Varma]: in different ways. So you keep sitting, and there are patterns by which somebody monitoring
[Amit Varma]: it from a control room. If you're sitting at a slot machine, and you sat for two hours,
[Amit Varma]: three hours, whatever someone from a control room can see from your patterns of play, and
[Amit Varma]: their past data, when you're about to get up. And then they will send somebody down
[Amit Varma]: who will say, sir, because you know, you've sat here for so long, you must be tired. Let's
[Amit Varma]: give you a complimentary drink, and they'll give you a drink, and then you keep playing.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a science that's there in the 80s or 90s. So everything that you see on
[Amit Varma]: social media today, was mastered by the whole gambling business a long time back and why
[Amit Varma]: the common thread is addiction. So today, all these big social media sites, they keep
[Amit Varma]: us hooked, they keep us addicted in this constant feedback loop of shallow impressions. Like
[Amit Varma]: one of the cleverest one was some social media sites. They did it so that when you earlier
[Amit Varma]: when you hit the back button, you get out of the app. Today, in most of these sites,
[Amit Varma]: you hit the back button, the page refreshes. Wow, like Pinterest, I think I see something
[Amit Varma]: else will come up. So you can't leave, you're kind of stuck there, right? And you can spend
[Amit Varma]: five hours on Instagram or whatever your social media poison of choice is. And you you've
[Amit Varma]: been busy, you haven't been bored, you know, but and I think that is sort of the challenge
[Amit Varma]: that people like you and I face and it ties in with that whole question of time like one
[Amit Varma]: of the questions I wanted to ask you, when I was reading your book, is that like number
[Amit Varma]: one, I wish again, I'd read your book in my 20s, because I would have made so many better
[Amit Varma]: decisions. But critically, you know, you've given great advice on how to spend your money.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me something about your thoughts on how to spend your time because time is an equally
[Amit Varma]: scarce resource. And what you know, what's the thinking you've done on it? How do you
[Guest]: how do you kind of maximize that? A lot of things lead into it, all of the stuff that
[Guest]: you mentioned, one of the things that I'll talk about time is, there are certain times
[Guest]: at which having a lot of options is complicated. It's that, you know, that, you know, choices,
[Guest]: choices, choices, dialogue that happened. And I think when Harry met Sally, at some
[Guest]: point, this was, this was a revelation to me, because having less to do at a certain
[Guest]: point is actually a benefit. We don't realize it. And I'll tell you, you know, so many thoughts
[Guest]: over here. So let me explore a few. So one of the things over here is my college days,
[Guest]: I was in a college called KRSE Suratkal. We had a beach next to the college and in the
[Guest]: beach, there was a big rock. And I would sit on that rock. And I would look at the sea
[Guest]: and I would dream and think and sometimes you really know what you are going to think
[Guest]: about. And sometimes you know exactly what you're going to think. And you would go there
[Guest]: and you let your mind wander. It would go it would go strange places. And I remember
[Guest]: those places today because I would remember something that is very difficult to do today
[Guest]: because you have a phone that can instantly you can sit on the beach and keep listening
[Guest]: to the waves and watch some random YouTube shots and all of that stuff and ruin the experience
[Guest]: because you have to let that boredom build a thought thread of its own that allows you
[Guest]: to explore and you're not building that you're just letting someone else dictate that from
[Guest]: you because you know, a tennis shot that was fantastic. Of course, it's a great shot Federer
[Guest]: and Nadal and all that stuff. But does that is that taking away from that building thought
[Guest]: process that would have germinated an idea that could have been very different in your
[Guest]: own thought process many years later. And I see this as it's both good and bad. I'll
[Guest]: tell you why. In my college days, I didn't have too much of an input. The inputs were
[Guest]: largely books, you would kind of look at them and kind of thing. Today, I have multiple
[Guest]: sorts of thoughts of input. So whether it's electric vehicles at some level or that, you
[Guest]: know, like some of the thoughts that you just we just talked about and you said, when people
[Guest]: don't trust, you can't really trust what what people are saying, because all manufactured,
[Guest]: you trust the authenticity of a person who's coming in. But in the past, people use this
[Guest]: for religion. Religion was there was a God who could not be untrue to you. And he was
[Guest]: your truth. And therefore it was your garden if multiple peoples kind of came in together
[Guest]: and said, my God is my truth. And then they all said, maybe it's the same God and then
[Guest]: they made it a religion. And in a way that was the same their their way to fight the
[Guest]: fact that there was an unreal, you know, manufactured world out there, perhaps in whatever little
[Guest]: way that was it was. But what's happened with time today, and perhaps spending time is more
[Guest]: important than spending money is that you can choose to spend it in 100 different ways.
[Guest]: But you can't choose to spend it on boredom unless you actually make an attempt to do
[Guest]: so. Which means it's not it doesn't mean locking you up in a room. It means can you take a
[Guest]: walk without having a phone and a your music on or you know, things like that. I know many
[Guest]: people for whom this is just simply for me, it becomes like I need a Bluetooth headset
[Guest]: and a podcast to be on so that I can walk. But I want to want something to keep triggering
[Guest]: my thinking. And I'm like, at this point, I need some time to just think that that that
[Guest]: song that Fursat Ke Raat Din, you know, that Fursat Ke Raat Din are not there anymore.
[Guest]: And it's a valuable resource because that word Fursat has a very deep meaning to me.
[Guest]: It is that the boredom germinates ideas and those ideas are very valuable for you to build
[Guest]: in a later life. So with the kids now, with my kids, for instance, I see the minute they
[Guest]: get bored, they want to touch a device and you know, accept something. The devices have
[Guest]: figured it out. The device also figured out that you need some Fursat in terms of less
[Guest]: activity when you're doing something. So I'll give you one of the examples. There's a YouTube
[Guest]: Shorts and there's Instagram Reels. You can't forward them. You can only watch this short,
[Guest]: they're not very long, but you can't go forward, you can't just skip to the end. So you actually
[Guest]: have to watch the whole thing. And like, okay, they're doing this because they know that
[Guest]: your mind is racing forward. And if you are given the option to go, you would go. But
[Guest]: they want to keep you there. So they're building that that Fursat thing right there. But they're
[Guest]: not giving you time to think that they're going to keep the screen on at all points
[Guest]: in time. And this is, in one sense, very evil, because it takes away from that point of saying,
[Guest]: listen, I just want to watch this, I want to go think about it. You're not giving me
[Guest]: the opportunity to do so. But at the same time addicting me with all the addiction influences
[Guest]: that you build. To get out of this, you have to have a mindset that says I will not conform.
[Guest]: And I need to get out of this to just think. This is a point I think, very few of us, I'll
[Guest]: give you one example. A lot of people I know told me this in the last two years. Deepak,
[Guest]: I miss international travel. I said, why? Two hours or eight hours of just me. You can't,
[Guest]: I mean, you may have a laptop or something like that. But many of them are like, you
[Guest]: know, I use that time to think, because there is no internet at the time. Well, I hope not,
[Guest]: but it's coming soon. But assuming that, you know, it's flaky is not going to happen. But
[Guest]: you just have your laptop, at best you have some movie that's playing, but you can switch
[Guest]: it off. But at the time, it's you time. And that you time I think is very important. And
[Guest]: so people I know who travel have gotten cranky about it. In the sense that they said, listen,
[Guest]: I don't have that time anymore. So I'm just losing it by, you know, not having those moments
[Guest]: of relief and release. More important than money is finding the space that you can do
[Guest]: this. Now, whether it takes money to do this or not, I don't know. But you know, it's like,
[Guest]: sometimes we would just sit in a coffee shop and sip coffee and do nothing. And you know,
[Guest]: sometimes just sit in front of each other and not even talk. Can we do that right now
[Guest]: in any meaningful way? I think the day you do that you're richer than most other people are.
[Guest]: And although I mean, we are also guilty because we're building a podcast that gives him so many
[Guest]: ideas in so many different ways, that perhaps people are like, okay, you're listening, I'm
[Guest]: listening to this, I'm getting my own ideas. But I'm not taking the time out right now,
[Guest]: because I want to listen to what comes next. But I think it's important to bring that point out to
[Guest]: say, get out there and be a little bit of, you know, finally, and this is where writing helps,
[Guest]: right? Because writing discovers you in a way that you haven't discovered yourself. So when
[Guest]: you write something down, you say, is that what I am what I'm thinking? And sometimes it is stupid,
[Guest]: the sentences don't string together, they don't make any sense. But sometimes you'll find yourself
[Guest]: becoming a Dave Barry. And I like Dave Barry, because he's one of the people who's really
[Guest]: inspired me to be myself. Once he wrote a sentence that lasted an entire full page,
[Guest]: and half of the next. And it ended with warning, warning, we are now reaching the end of the
[Guest]: sentence. So, because the sentence just kept on rambling and going, I'm like, you know what,
[Guest]: he can write like this. It's like I'm in his head. And he in the process of writing this,
[Guest]: he's probably discovered a little boat about himself when he did it. And the only way I
[Guest]: could have figured that out was when I wrote that Abeyar or whatever it was, it was me with my head
[Guest]: writing what was on the what was on the page. And I think it ties into the concept of time in the
[Guest]: sense of how do you spend how do you spend your time meaningfully is perhaps to not spend your
[Guest]: time meaningfully is to find meaning in whatever you whatever you're thinking rather than in trying
[Guest]: to spend your time doing something specific. When you talked about the process, one of the
[Guest]: things that I think you should be included in in any longer term thought processes,
[Guest]: the time to sit back and say, dude, I don't know what's happening. But this is my postmortem or
[Guest]: my thought process is where I just let my mind think it should be the part of the process itself,
[Guest]: rather than saying, this is the process and I'll go outside of it and think of the process
[Guest]: at a later point. So give yourself that for 10 minutes of I don't know what this is,
[Guest]: but I have to take some time out and think, do you find that fursat thing meaningful or exciting?
[Amit Varma]: It's very meaningful. But what has happened is we've gotten so used to our addictions of
[Amit Varma]: constant sensation and dopamine hits and all that it becomes difficult. Like I remember a long time
[Amit Varma]: back, I'd recorded this episode with Santosh Desai on Indian society of the last 30 years.
[Amit Varma]: And in the intro of that, I think I did some kind of dream sequence where I imagined
[Amit Varma]: somebody just sitting in a cafe without a smartphone. And everybody else is looking
[Amit Varma]: into a screen. And there is this one person who doesn't have anything and they're looking around
[Amit Varma]: and gradually everyone notices this one person. And it's spooky because it's like a psychopath,
[Amit Varma]: right? What kind of person would do something like that? And there was this interesting Twitter
[Amit Varma]: thread by one of my writing students, Gurpreya, who is based in Bangalore. And the thread was
[Amit Varma]: about how she's found a couple of times when she's sitting in a cafe by herself,
[Amit Varma]: people on other tables, you know, girls or mixed groups or whatever will say, Oh, you're alone,
[Amit Varma]: why don't you join us? Which is really interesting. But the interesting part, the part that really
[Amit Varma]: struck me was she said that I wasn't looking into my smartphone. And she said that had I been looking
[Amit Varma]: into my smartphone, nobody would have disturbed me. But I wasn't looking into my smartphone.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there is this human connection and maybe new friends and whatever. And I find
[Amit Varma]: that very touching. Right? And you know, it's where are those human connections is a question
[Amit Varma]: you have to ask. And it's a question in multiple levels. And I'll throw you another related question,
[Amit Varma]: which is, I have in recent years, been thinking about, okay, before I come to this, you had said
[Amit Varma]: something earlier about how at one point, you thought you were the center of the world and
[Amit Varma]: everything was made for you. So I quickly dug up this Douglas Adams quote, I love the quote about
[Amit Varma]: a puddle. Have you heard it? No, no, no, no. So let me read this out for you. This is Douglas Adams.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine a puddle waking up one morning and thinking, this is an interesting world I find
[Amit Varma]: myself in an interesting hole I find myself in fits me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact,
[Amit Varma]: it fits me staggeringly well, must have been made to have me in it. This is such a powerful idea
[Amit Varma]: that as the sun rises in the sky, and the air heats up, and as gradually the puddle gets smaller
[Amit Varma]: and smaller, is still frantically hanging on to the notion that everything's going to be all right,
[Amit Varma]: because this world was meant to have him in it was built to have a minute. So the moment it
[Amit Varma]: disappears, catches him rather by surprise. I think this might be something we need to be on
[Amit Varma]: the watch out for. Stop quote, right. And I just love this quote, our over inflated sense of
[Amit Varma]: ourselves as a species and also at a personal level. And the question I was coming to is this
[Amit Varma]: that Kant, not Amitabh Kant, but the philosopher Immanuel Kant, you know, once coined, like he
[Amit Varma]: coined a number of categorical imperatives. And one of them was this, that never treat another
[Amit Varma]: person as a means to an end, treat them as an end in itself. And I think of this and I think
[Amit Varma]: that, is it the case that much of my life is really me being this puddle, me being at the
[Amit Varma]: center of everything, and everybody else is a character in my play, they are instrumental to me.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not trying hard enough to look at them as real people. And I think that this is actually
[Amit Varma]: perhaps a default mode for most of us. And you have to become mindful and try a little harder
[Amit Varma]: to make those connections and to not sort of do this. You know, for example, Stephen Covey once
[Amit Varma]: said, talking about conversation and listening, Stephen Covey said, most people don't listen to
[Amit Varma]: understand, they listen to respond. Right. And what is the key point here, the key point is that
[Amit Varma]: you and I are having a conversation, but I might be listening to you waiting to jump in at some
[Amit Varma]: point. So I can show how clever I am, or how right I am, and so on and so forth. And it becomes my
[Amit Varma]: ego. So then the conversation becomes completely about my ego. I'm not really listening. And I
[Amit Varma]: arrived at the ethic of never interrupting any of my guests in conversation, you know, and I just
[Amit Varma]: find that listening is beautiful when people open up to you. Like, first of all, it's an enormous
[Amit Varma]: privilege when people open up to you. I did an episode with Mrinal Pandey, I asked her my first
[Amit Varma]: question, she spoke for an hour. Yeah, I just sat and listened. And it was magic, you got to listen
[Amit Varma]: to that. And so many people wrote in young people wrote in saying this made us cry. We send it to
[Amit Varma]: our parents. Right. And if I interrupt her in the third minute, and I say, Oh, can you tell me a
[Amit Varma]: little bit more about this? The magic is doesn't happen. The magic is gone. You know, so you kind
[Amit Varma]: of sit back and listen. And even there, you could say I'm treating her as instrumental because I'm
[Amit Varma]: getting a good episode out of it. We don't know our own, you know, there is a scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: about the things that we do as well. So what are your thoughts on this? Like, when you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you grow older, you have family, you have kids, you know, they're real people, you know, you have
[Amit Varma]: colleagues in this wonderful, incredibly swank high tech office of yours. So, you know, is this
[Guest]: something you've thought about? Well, it happens all the time, to be honest, you know, it's very
[Guest]: weird, because sometimes somebody comes to you with a problem. And I'm sure all of us have
[Guest]: experienced this at some point. Amit, you know what, there's this thing that's happening with
[Guest]: with Russia and Ukraine. And you know, I can't understand what's happening. And now you're
[Guest]: listening. And you're not saying anything. And I'm going to, you know, Russia's attacked Ukraine,
[Guest]: and it's doing all this thing. And then we're worried about what happens to, you know, the
[Guest]: prices of crude, but how long can Russia attack? You know what, can it keep on attacking? Well,
[Guest]: no. And while I'm talking to you about this, the clarity starts to appear in my own head.
[Guest]: You almost don't have to do anything. You almost like literally looking at me and saying go on.
[Guest]: And at some point, I come to a conclusion that the fear and the anger and the thing that I came
[Guest]: with, half of it is evaporated simply because I've talked it out to you at one level. And I've
[Guest]: discovered, I mean, this is me being a little sexist is that my XY chromosome, the Y portion
[Guest]: missed that little element of understanding when it was only time to listen. And when it was time
[Guest]: to give suggestions or take action to my wife to the to this day is like, this is only for listening.
[Guest]: So I shut up and listen. And it's incredibly, you know, I'm a rational person, I like to say,
[Guest]: but I none of us are rational. So this is one of my behavioral traits that just gets me is that I
[Guest]: don't get it, that I have to just listen sometimes. And it's okay if it doesn't leave with an answer.
[Guest]: And even if you know the answer, or if you know that there is there are five things I can suggest
[Guest]: to you that would give you that would solve this problem. Sometimes I don't have to solve the
[Guest]: problem. It's just that the person wants to enter talk or something like that. I use this often as
[Guest]: a one way communication on Twitter to wait. At this point, I don't even care what people are
[Guest]: responding to me about because I is not meant for a response. It is just me talking, but I can do
[Guest]: that on Twitter because I'm comfortable with it. But in person, when a person sitting in front of
[Guest]: it almost like, if he's telling me this, it's my duty to respond to that person and give him advice
[Guest]: or give my gyan on it and all that. But much as I I mean, much as I find that this is a behavioral
[Guest]: problem of us not listening, I think to a large extent, we're not we find you know, this concept
[Guest]: of just listening is like reading a book, because the author is talking to you, you aren't talking
[Guest]: to the author. Right? So and you have no problem with that, because that's what you want to do.
[Guest]: You want to hear the why do we find it so difficult to do this in person is something that
[Guest]: is astounding, because sometimes a person has great things to say. And you know what we are,
[Guest]: you can see these religious sermons, you can see a talk on YouTube by somebody, and you want to
[Guest]: watch that talk is it's a one way conversation, it's still coming at you, but the person is not
[Guest]: talking to you directly. But if the person was sitting on the opposite side of the table,
[Guest]: suddenly the whole thing changes into I don't want to listen to you anymore. I want to tell
[Guest]: you what to say. I want to tell you my opinion in the middle. Why does this happen? And why?
[Guest]: I mean, should it be prevented? Of course, I mean, I think we can always do things better.
[Guest]: But at some point, I think, you know, freewheeling listening, what is the difference between are you
[Guest]: hearing things? And are you actually listening to things is so for instance, I have a fundamental
[Guest]: problem in being in a closed room in a seminar, I fall asleep. And this has been such a big
[Guest]: problem for me even in the context of so like I say, you know, if I'm in a conference room,
[Guest]: I better be the one talking. Because if I'm the one listening, then I'm going to fall asleep
[Guest]: at some point. It's just that there's some part of my part of me that is just designed to I can
[Guest]: absorb reading, I can absorb listening, or do you see the minute you put me in a position where I
[Guest]: can talk and I'm not allowed to, it just, you know, I have to fight it a lot. I'm 47. So I've
[Guest]: learned a little bit of, you know, how to deal with it. But it's surprising how little I do
[Guest]: the same thing, for instance, when my kids want to talk to me. Because when the kids want to talk
[Guest]: to you're like, I'm dad, I know everything, right? So you should do this. And suddenly,
[Guest]: you're like, I don't know everything. My son recently, I don't know what they teach people
[Guest]: in ninth standard these days, but this, it's far more complicated math than I've ever imagined.
[Guest]: So he will come and say, Daddy, but what about this? And what about that? And you've read
[Guest]: something on the internet. And I feel it's like my job to educate him about this. But he doesn't
[Guest]: want me to educate him. He's already figured it out. He wants to tell me that he knows.
[Guest]: And why can't I just listen to him and say, well, you know, this is great. Tell me more.
[Guest]: I find it astounding that I can't it's I don't know whether everybody has this problem. Obviously,
[Guest]: everybody doesn't because people but it it's, it's like you like hearing the sound of your
[Guest]: own voice. And therefore, you have to have your voice in every conversation sounds terribly
[Guest]: irrational to me, but it's who I am for some reason. And it's a part of me that I just don't
[Guest]: like. It's like, you know, I wish I had. I wish for all those times that I had great conversations
[Guest]: that I was more of a listener than a talker. So there was this book, I remember reading a
[Amit Varma]: couple of decades back, random self-help book, I don't even know why I read it. It's called
[Amit Varma]: men are from Mars, women are from Venus, by John Gray. And he speaks about exactly this thing. And
[Amit Varma]: of course, he's essentializing and today, it's not politically correct to say that men have
[Amit Varma]: innate traits and women have different whatever, everyone's supposed to be a blank slate,
[Amit Varma]: which is, of course, not the case. But his point about men was that men are always in problem
[Amit Varma]: solving mode. If you talk to them about a problem, they will want to offer you a solution, right?
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes like you're like, you know, you were describing in your conversations with your wife,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes they don't want solutions, they just want to be heard, they just want, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they just want that kind of empathetic environment. And you don't actually have to, you know, put your
[Amit Varma]: engineering cap on and solve the damn problem. And I think at some level, it's also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we are so focused on ourselves sometimes, that we feel that we have to show that we exist to
[Amit Varma]: ourselves. But you know, it's like Descartes said, I think therefore I exist. It's really,
[Amit Varma]: I solve your problem, therefore I exist. It's the ego, it's the whole male ego thing. And there's
[Amit Varma]: definitely something to that because women don't do this. And if anything, if anything, and this
[Amit Varma]: is really a problem with our society, if anything, they don't speak up enough and they listen,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you'll have good listeners there. And there is, you know, this kind of confidence issue
[Amit Varma]: there. And you see this dynamic playing out where if you have a meeting with men and women, just
[Amit Varma]: listen to who talks more, listen to, you know, just those dynamics, who interrupts more,
[Amit Varma]: like women will get interrupted more, by far, it's not even close. Right? If you just sit at a cafe
[Amit Varma]: without a smartphone, so in full psychopath mode, and you just listen to the conversations around
[Amit Varma]: you, it can actually kind of be very interesting in these different ways. So I'd say the thing is
[Amit Varma]: not to beat ourselves up too much. The thing is just to be mindful of these things and just to
[Amit Varma]: try to be aware. Because at some level, you also realize that, you know, and I don't know what the
[Amit Varma]: listeners would feel about this, but sometimes you become aware of your own frailties, and you can do
[Amit Varma]: something about them. And sometimes they're just ingrained in you. And at the most, you try to
[Amit Varma]: control their manifestations and you try to sort of control your behavior the best you can and
[Amit Varma]: mindfulness helps. But you know, sometimes you kind of accept, you know, accept the hard wiring
[Amit Varma]: and say that, okay, this is a hard wiring, I won't be ruled by it. Like I think a lot of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we are of course, a product of a combination of nature and nurture, as Steven Pinker memorably
[Amit Varma]: said, nature gives us knobs, nurture turns them. And the way I think of the progress of civilization
[Amit Varma]: over the last few centuries, particularly the Enlightenment onwards, is that we are mitigating
[Amit Varma]: our hard wiring. That nurture is, you know, one of the things that we were hardwired to do is think
[Amit Varma]: independently about our hard wiring, which is not something any other creature has, only humans have
[Amit Varma]: that. So I can look at myself and think that I am programmed to be like this, but I can fight it,
[Amit Varma]: that I can sort of, you know, and that's a lot of the Enlightenment values stress towards that,
[Amit Varma]: that we can intellectually imagine a better society. And then we can work towards it. And
[Amit Varma]: of course, we are hardwired in many contradictory ways, we are hardwired as much for selfishness and
[Amit Varma]: greed as we are also hardwired for altruism and empathy, right? It's which knobs you then decide
[Amit Varma]: to focus on and how you kind of control your behavior. Sorry, that's a bit of a ramble.
[Guest]: No, no, it's been quite interesting. Because I think this ties into the point of, I mean,
[Guest]: coming back to say, the creator economy and the way things are, the fact that we are talking about
[Guest]: this and recognizing, and this is actually a prime example, where in my mainstream media,
[Guest]: and perhaps even on a radio talk show or anything like that, would you ever find some nuance like
[Guest]: this being discussed to this extreme, without somebody saying, listen, there's not enough of
[Guest]: an audience for this, or that, oh, no, no, my 90% of my audience wants a Bollywood discussion,
[Guest]: or I wonder, so should we just focus? So this is where I think, you know, the times of today kind
[Guest]: of coming back to this, we've changed the way we produce content in the sense that earlier it was
[Guest]: blogging and now it's gone to, you know, and you've talked about it a little bit in your
[Guest]: presentation, I think you said, the reason, the way to do things has moved from a blogging text
[Guest]: interface to audio plus YouTube plus a bunch of other interfaces and so on. And this is where I
[Guest]: mean, I think you probably will see this better. And I want to bring this back to you on that,
[Guest]: you know, on that aspect. How does this change? I mean, so for instance, what are the constraints?
[Guest]: So you're, you're, you're sitting here with a different world today than it was when we started
[Guest]: off. And when we started off, I don't think when I was 20, I could have ever imagined that I would
[Guest]: be talking and hundreds of people would be listening, without me being on some fancy TV
[Guest]: channel or without some fans. It was almost impossible to imagine that people would listen,
[Guest]: you could stand with a soapbox in the middle of MG Road, and two people will listen. And mostly
[Guest]: they'll tell you to shut up. Right now, if they're telling you to shut up, it's probably a small part
[Guest]: of the brigade, but there are enough people listening. Anyways, what happened here? And
[Guest]: how did those little constraints and change over? You know, I think you have a great handle on this.
[Guest]: And you've seen this evolve, because you've gone from being a mainstream media person, to a blogger
[Guest]: to a sort of mainstream media person to a podcaster to now, broadcaster, plus educator,
[Amit Varma]: plus so many other things. What's changed? Okay, so just for the listeners, the presentation
[Amit Varma]: Deepak is referring to is a presentation I've given in a couple of places. I think I also did
[Amit Varma]: it for Spotify podcasting day last year when they asked me to talk about the creator economy.
[Amit Varma]: And I just shared it with Deepak and he said, let's chat about this. Now, here's the thing,
[Amit Varma]: the world has changed so fast and so drastically that we almost don't notice. Now, I divide the
[Amit Varma]: history of creation really into five periods. And one is got to Gutenberg, you know, G2G,
[Amit Varma]: which is basically till the invention of the printing press, right? And I don't need to
[Amit Varma]: elaborate what the scene there is that you can't achieve scale and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, you don't have access to what other creators have created necessarily, it's limited,
[Amit Varma]: and your audiences are limited, and so on and so forth. Now, then the second age is a mechanical
[Amit Varma]: age, which is all the way to, let's say the early 2000s, where the printing press, television,
[Amit Varma]: all of that is included. Then I talk about sort of the blogging and early social media age,
[Amit Varma]: which is the aughties. And then there is a YouTube and Instagram age, which is the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 2010-11 onwards to 2019. And then number five, I grandiosely call it the age of the creator,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, started in 2020, not necessarily enhanced by the pandemic, I think it
[Amit Varma]: was kind of happening anyway. Now, let's quickly go back to the constraints that we faced or the
[Amit Varma]: constraints that both of us would have faced as creators in the 90s. Number one, we don't have
[Amit Varma]: the means of production. So if I want to write something, who's going to publish it, who's going
[Amit Varma]: to get it out there, I have to, you know, send it to a newspaper or find a publisher or all of those
[Amit Varma]: things, right? Number two, access, that I am dependent on gatekeepers for that to happen,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and I have to meet, you know, there is a consensus on the truth, and there's a consensus
[Amit Varma]: on style, and I have to go through them. If I'm writing for someone, I have to be, you know,
[Amit Varma]: follow the news cycle, write about something which is topical. Number three, there are restrictive
[Amit Varma]: formats. So if I want to write something, you know, an article is 800 words, a book is 100,000,
[Amit Varma]: or whatever it is, if I'm a filmmaker, I can make a 24 minute episode for a serial because the other
[Amit Varma]: six minutes, it would pair it up with ads, or a 90 minute Bollywood film or a three hour
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood film. So those are the formats which are constraints on me also. The fourth constraint
[Amit Varma]: is connecting with audiences, that I can randomly write or make something but I don't have a direct
[Amit Varma]: connect with my audience where I'm speaking to them all the time and they're speaking to me.
[Amit Varma]: And the final one is making money, where, you know, if I read something by you, Deepak, I'm
[Amit Varma]: actually paying for it because time is money. I spent half an hour reading something you've written,
[Amit Varma]: I value it. It's evident because time is money. I spent half an hour reading it, I value it.
[Amit Varma]: You should have a way to capture some of this value directly. Now what used to happen in the
[Amit Varma]: 90s is you write for a newspaper, they'll aggregate eyeballs, they'll get advertisers,
[Amit Varma]: and you'll get a tiny, tiny chunk of that, right? You don't have a direct way of benefiting from the
[Amit Varma]: value that you provide to others. Now this sort of, so these are the five sort of constraints
[Amit Varma]: that I saw the means of production, the access slash gatekeepers problem, the restrictive forms,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, direct connect with the audience and directly making money. Now this kind of started
[Amit Varma]: changing with the blogging age in the sense that the means of production opened up for us, right?
[Amit Varma]: And so I was at that time in Crickinfo, and part of mainstream media there, but I wanted to write
[Amit Varma]: about other stuff. So I could just start a blog. And, you know, so no gatekeepers, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: and in terms of form, I was freed, I didn't have to follow the news cycle, I can write about
[Amit Varma]: whatever the hell I want. I don't have to do 800 words, I can do 80 words, eight words, because
[Amit Varma]: there's no Twitter. So even microblogging happened, you can have eight words with a link.
[Amit Varma]: I have seen some of your posts.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I used to do five posts a day. I think my record was 17 posts in a day. But,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I did some 8000 posts in five years. So you are not constrained by the news cycle.
[Amit Varma]: You're not constrained by word count, you can be 80 or 80,000. You're not the 80,000 blog posts
[Amit Varma]: would be a big much. You're not constrained by style. You can find your own voice. You know,
[Amit Varma]: you for example, if you were blogging, you could say, you know, no senior sub editor at Hindustan
[Amit Varma]: Times is going to say that no, this, you know, you're not allowed to use this language.
[Amit Varma]: And you could connect directly with audiences because you would have comments and all that. I
[Amit Varma]: think my blog went beyond a certain level of traffic where the noise to signal ratio went out
[Amit Varma]: of whack. So I disabled them like many other big blogs did, but you had a direct connect and people
[Amit Varma]: would still write to me. But two things didn't happen here. It was still hard to make money from
[Amit Varma]: your audiences directly, unless you were like a superb superstar tech blogger or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And mainstream media remained mainstream. Like when I started writing my blog, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the Wall Street Journal came to me and said, Oh, why don't you write for us? Mint gave me a column,
[Amit Varma]: which later won me the Bussier Prize. So many of the benefits from the blogging came in these
[Amit Varma]: indirect ways, where I was validated by the mainstream media. And that was still very much
[Amit Varma]: the model at that time. Right. So even when Nate Silver does what he does with his data analytics
[Amit Varma]: and 525 and all, eventually NYT comes to him and says, Hey, you come for us. And that becomes,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the next step. So there is a hierarchy of success and mainstream media
[Amit Varma]: is still at the top. Now in the YouTube Instagram age that what 2012 to 2019,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll probably put up a newsletter post and link it where I expand on these ideas. So it's
[Amit Varma]: easier for people to refer to what happens is a means of production opens up for all media,
[Amit Varma]: not just a written word, right, including audio visual, including podcasting, like the kind of
[Amit Varma]: recording that we are doing now is doable within the budget of an individual. But 30 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: it would simply not have been possible. And we were discussing before this that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've built this beautiful YouTube cum podcasting studio, and you do a lot of your editing with
[Amit Varma]: DaVinci Resolve, right? Now, DaVinci Resolve was originally a pro color grading software,
[Amit Varma]: which later became a fantastic editing suite. And now it's available, there's a free version,
[Amit Varma]: which basically does whatever you want it to do. And it's available. And even the paid version
[Amit Varma]: doesn't cost much. And in 2010, DaVinci Resolve, only the color grading, not without the editing
[Amit Varma]: suite, only the color grading you today get, which today you get a better version of that for free.
[Amit Varma]: In 2010, it cost $800,000. My God, because this is what Hollywood used, you would not get it on
[Amit Varma]: a PC or a laptop or your computer or whatever. There were special machines built for it. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, when films were sent for color grading, you'd pay big amounts of money, send it to the US
[Amit Varma]: from India, for example, get it color graded, get it set back. And that's kind of what it was. And
[Amit Varma]: this is just the extreme example that I can think of, right? And today, it's free on every PC and
[Amit Varma]: every laptop, it's completely open. And, you know, genius is no longer constrained by the means of
[Amit Varma]: production. Like when TikTok came to India, that first year and a half, and I love TikTok, because
[Amit Varma]: for the rest of content also, there was a sort of class system in play in the sense that you saw a
[Amit Varma]: certain profile of person who would on Instagram on whatever. TikTok democratized that because it
[Amit Varma]: happened around simultaneously when Jio happened, and broadband access went everywhere, smartphone
[Amit Varma]: access was much more common. And people could just point their cell phone camera at themselves
[Amit Varma]: and shoot stuff. And the kind of creativity one got from villages, the kind of empowerment,
[Amit Varma]: for example, for people of alternate sexualities, who suddenly see TikTok stars and TikTok content,
[Amit Varma]: which is by people like them, right? Which in a geographically constrained area like a village,
[Amit Varma]: you may not think there was someone like you may think that, you know, and suddenly that opens up
[Amit Varma]: and then you realize one day that I can also create I can also do this. And you start with
[Amit Varma]: low hanging fruit, like lip syncing to something or dramatizing a track that is already there.
[Amit Varma]: And then you move on from there. And one saw that journey. And I briefly taught a course on TikTok
[Amit Varma]: in Indian society also, but I did one course, one cohort of it and, and I did it on WhatsApp. So
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp University and the reason I did it on WhatsApp is I needed to share hundreds of vertical
[Amit Varma]: videos, which was couldn't do it on zoom or anything else. So anyway, so that kind of so
[Amit Varma]: to that extent, the means of production opened up, mainstream media started fading in power.
[Amit Varma]: So you had creators like Casey Neistat, for example, the YouTube guy who's making enough
[Amit Varma]: money who doesn't need to be signed by a Hollywood studio or Netflix or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Though it's all good if that happens, but he's making enough money YouTube creators start making
[Amit Varma]: enough money where they don't have to think about validation from big mainstream houses. You look
[Amit Varma]: at YouTube creators today like Mr. Beast and so on. It's not you know, it wasn't necessary. And
[Amit Varma]: the technology enabled you now to go beyond all formats. And maybe creators were slow to catch up
[Amit Varma]: to it and all of that. But you no longer had to do 24 minutes or 90 minutes or whatever you could
[Amit Varma]: think in terms of just any damn thing. Yeah, five minutes to five hours,
[Amit Varma]: to five hours, I have streams which have gone on for six, seven hours and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And the whole sort of the whole streaming economy on Twitch and even YouTube is insane. And that's
[Amit Varma]: another sort of way in which intimate content comes up where you see people in their everyday
[Amit Varma]: lives just doing whatever, and those connections form. And creators began to form communities of
[Amit Varma]: fans, where you know, you could set up a discord server, or you know, you could form those kinds
[Amit Varma]: of communities for yourself set up a Patreon page. And that's the next point that you could take,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you could monetize directly without necessarily being part of a big platform,
[Amit Varma]: except that in this time till maybe 2019, most of it would still come from ads and sponsors.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't have the middleman in between, right? So if I'm making audiovisual content,
[Amit Varma]: I don't have to sell it to a star plus, I can take it to YouTube directly. But it's still ads
[Amit Varma]: and sponsors where the money is coming from, you're still not taking enough money directly
[Amit Varma]: from the consumer. Now, all this has been upended 2020 onwards. One, the means of production have,
[Amit Varma]: of course, opened up even further, right? And people have started vlogs and all of that with
[Amit Varma]: their smartphone and just gone way beyond. Mainstream media, I believe, has disintegrated
[Amit Varma]: and become completely irrelevant. It's not even a factor. New formats have emerged intimate content
[Amit Varma]: has grown. Every creator can now build their own community. You know, you can use discord servers,
[Amit Varma]: you can do newsletters, you can kind of do whatever, you know, and creators can now make
[Amit Varma]: money directly from fans, where the whole buy me a coffee thing like 10 years back, if you told me
[Amit Varma]: that a creator is going to say that if you enjoyed my content, pay for it yourself, I would have said
[Amit Varma]: no way that's going to work because micropayments, friction, all of that. It really works. You know,
[Amit Varma]: I have myself experienced enough love from my listeners that has kept me independent,
[Amit Varma]: that I don't need to work that it's fine, you know, so the whole thing of four podcasters don't
[Amit Varma]: make money is not true anymore. I'm independent, I'm getting by, it's kind of worked for me. And
[Amit Varma]: you can make it in different ways when you form communities and think outside the box.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, because I know that enough people have enough exposure to me that there's a certain
[Amit Varma]: credibility, I can then sell an online writing course. And people will come for that. And
[Amit Varma]: obviously, it cannot be a cynical exercise, you got to do a good job. Otherwise, you don't come
[Amit Varma]: back. You know, and and then over a period of time, what happens is that people initially sign
[Amit Varma]: up for the course, because they've heard the podcast, and they know you're legit. But then
[Amit Varma]: they sign up for the course, because other people who've done the course tell them that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this is a good course, it meant something to me. So in all these ways,
[Amit Varma]: it's changed the game for creators, to the extent that creators now can sort of think,
[Amit Varma]: you know, outside those early boxes. And some advice, I'll quickly go through six pieces of
[Amit Varma]: advice that I give creators, since we are on the subject. One is, it is no longer necessary to
[Amit Varma]: scale. Back in the day, you have your top point 5% to manage to scale and make a lot of money,
[Amit Varma]: everyone else, it's a labor of love. Now, you can reach what Kevin Kelly calls 1000 true fans,
[Amit Varma]: where Kevin Kelly wrote this essay more than a decade ago, where he said that if you get 1000
[Amit Varma]: true fans will pay $100 a year each, that's $100,000, you don't need more than that, right?
[Amit Varma]: And the amounts can vary, and most people would get by with less. And that became such a reality
[Amit Varma]: with Substack, because a typical Substack annual subscription is $100. And there are tons of people
[Amit Varma]: who have never been heard of before. You know, like Bill Bishop, who writes, you know, a gentleman,
[Amit Varma]: I think in his 50s, who writes a newsletter on China called cynicism, right? cynicism, not not
[Amit Varma]: cynicism, and, and 1000s of paid up subscribers. So you have people making tons of money and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, making it work for them. So you don't have to aim for scale, you just have to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and there's another writer, I forget her name, who wrote another essay recently,
[Amit Varma]: taking off from that and talking about 100 true fans who will pay $1,000 each. And there are
[Amit Varma]: people who are actually successful with that model. Right. And because what happened, what
[Amit Varma]: happened was that, as a creator, you discover a niche, which otherwise would not have existed.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the other when when there's mainstream media, and they're going broad, and they're not
[Amit Varma]: going deep, not only do they not cater to niches, they don't do those niches don't form because
[Amit Varma]: nobody knows out there. And then something happens, and boom, they blow up. So the LGBT
[Amit Varma]: thing that you talked about the niches there. Yeah. And that's, of course, a huge niche. It's
[Amit Varma]: not even a niche. It's like, it's just, you know, so huge to creators, I think should think in terms
[Amit Varma]: of reach and revenue. You do some things for each and you do some things for revenue. And
[Amit Varma]: reaches the first thing you build, you know, you build credibility, you build trust. And then sort
[Amit Varma]: of the revenue happens and you have to be clear and you can't do everything for revenue. Like,
[Amit Varma]: and this is me thinking, this is all post hoc me thinking in hindsight, it wasn't planned like this.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact is, like all my blogging years, I made nothing from blogging, right? Directly. It
[Amit Varma]: was a labor of love. I enjoyed doing it. Similarly, you know, the seen and the unseen has existed for
[Amit Varma]: more than five years. And for the first three and a half years, I made nothing zero, right? It was a
[Amit Varma]: labor of love. I just enjoyed doing it. So I did it. But it worked out because it got me that trust,
[Amit Varma]: it got me that credibility, it got me the reach, and then the revenue kicks in in various other
[Amit Varma]: ways. So you've got to kind of define what you're doing and why. And three, build a community of
[Amit Varma]: your fans once upon a time you couldn't, like, you know, people when who do my writing course,
[Amit Varma]: those who want to be journalists will sometimes say that, you know, is there an editor at TOI,
[Amit Varma]: you can give the email ID, we'll write to them, we'll write to people at Express. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: I help them in whatever way I can. But my main advice is, don't do that. For a number of reasons.
[Amit Varma]: One, there'll be a gatekeeper, you'll have to follow a particular house style, you'll have
[Amit Varma]: to cater to the news cycle. Two, your work will appear sporadically. And therefore you're not
[Amit Varma]: writing enough. And if you're not, you know, you become excellent at something by doing it again
[Amit Varma]: and again, you want to write as much as you can. And three, it's very dispersed all over the place
[Amit Varma]: and you're not building a community of fans. So if I read something by Deepak Chinoy in Hindu
[Amit Varma]: Sun Times, and I say, wow, this guy really knows what he's talking about. But the next moment I've
[Amit Varma]: forgotten about it. Whereas if I click on a link on social media, and I read a great piece by
[Amit Varma]: Deepak Chinoy, and there's a thing subscribe to my newsletter, I put in my email ID, everything you
[Amit Varma]: subsequently do comes to me, that email database, by the way, belongs to you. For every creator on
[Amit Varma]: Substract, the email database belongs to the creator, you can so I automatically become part
[Amit Varma]: of a community of Deepak Chinoy fans, you can send me more pieces, you can crowdsource funds
[Amit Varma]: from me for various things. Tomorrow, when you have a podcast, you notify me I subscribe to that.
[Amit Varma]: Tomorrow, if you teach a course, and which you absolutely should, frankly, then you know, I might
[Amit Varma]: sign up for that. All of that happens. So building that kind of community is important. My fifth out
[Amit Varma]: of the six commandments, as it were, is don't pigeonhole yourself. Too often, you think, oh,
[Amit Varma]: I want to be a writer, I want to do this. And this is what I want. But the point is, if you're a
[Amit Varma]: creative person, there are multiple things that you can do. So don't pigeonhole yourself. Maybe
[Amit Varma]: it's writing, maybe it's podcasts, conversations like this. Like if you're someone listening to
[Amit Varma]: this right now and thinking that, oh, I've heard so many of Amit's episodes, and I love his
[Amit Varma]: conversations, what the hell stops you from having conversations like this? What stops you? Nothing
[Amit Varma]: stops you. You could start at home. Like, you know, before my father passed a year or so back,
[Amit Varma]: I sat down with, you know, a recording device. And we just had a conversation and asked him about his
[Amit Varma]: life and did that. And you can do that at home now with your parents. You know, maybe you can
[Amit Varma]: have a conversation with your spouse and ask her and you ask him, and you might discover things
[Amit Varma]: that you hadn't realized. Like one of my guests, I won't name him, mutual friend of ours, did a
[Amit Varma]: four-hour episode with me. And after it was done, his wife got mad at him and said that you told
[Amit Varma]: Amit so many things you have never told me. And they've been married for some 35 years.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, try having conversations, it can work. And my fifth of my commandments is
[Amit Varma]: don't worry about metrics. You know, here again, we have to get past that whole anxiety of what
[Amit Varma]: other people think of us. And the problem is that I think creators tend to what, and this is also
[Amit Varma]: said about futurists and science fiction writers, but it's true of creators, we tend to overestimate
[Amit Varma]: the short term and underestimate the long term. So in the sense, I'll start a podcast and I'll
[Amit Varma]: think, arre ban jayenge superstar, itne log sunenge and all of that and that never happens,
[Amit Varma]: right? It takes time. You know, it takes time to grow organically, but also it takes time for you
[Amit Varma]: to become good. Because whenever you start at something, as you and I know, whenever you start
[Amit Varma]: at something you suck at it, you know, how do you become better, you become better by doing it again
[Amit Varma]: and again and again and again, if validation is going to be the sole motivation for doing it again
[Amit Varma]: and again, you will just stop. And then you will never get good. And it will be an opportunity
[Amit Varma]: lost. And you could say it will be the unseen. So you just have to. So therefore, when you start
[Amit Varma]: off doing something in the creator economy, start off with something you love, which you would do
[Amit Varma]: anyway, right? So the motivation is intrinsic, it comes from within, and then you become better. And
[Amit Varma]: then the growth is really exponential. It's kind of like, I mean, maybe you'd be better placed to
[Amit Varma]: comment on whether compound interest is a bit like that. But you know, it takes time, don't
[Amit Varma]: underestimate what the long term can do. And my final commandment is that, and we've discussed an
[Amit Varma]: aspect of this before, that be authentic to yourself, right? 7 billion people on this planet,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what makes you unique, Deepak? It's Deepak. There's nothing else, you know, and I
[Amit Varma]: would say at a broad level, we are all basically the same with minor differences in hardwiring and
[Amit Varma]: circumstances, but basically the same, but what sets you apart, the only thing that sets you apart
[Amit Varma]: is yourself and you don't need to do anything else. You want to start a podcast, you don't
[Amit Varma]: need to do voice modulation, you don't need to do any of that crap. So you know, if you want to be a
[Amit Varma]: creator, therefore, in a nutshell, I would say that don't overthink it. Jump into it. There's
[Amit Varma]: a trade off between getting it done and getting it right. You know, and the only way to get it right
[Amit Varma]: is by getting it done. Just get it done, do it again and again, you'll eventually get it right.
[Amit Varma]: So just jump into it, do something you love. Don't worry about validation at first,
[Amit Varma]: recognize that you probably suck, and just do it again and again. So you become better
[Guest]: and just enjoy the process. Yeah, this is this is so rich. I mean,
[Guest]: there's so many things to take out from here. But I think you've succinctly put it in. It's that
[Guest]: it's a phase of the economy that is that has empowered people, ordinary people, you and me
[Guest]: and a bunch of other people who earlier thought they didn't have any way to express their voice
[Guest]: to monetize their or make it a living. Because doing what you love is one thing, but doing what
[Guest]: you love and earning money from it that makes a living possible is a part of the world that's
[Guest]: only happened now. And I mean, I really think so many of these things resound with me completely,
[Guest]: especially about short term versus long term. Now I've been blogging for since what,
[Guest]: 2004 to now, in Capital Mind itself. And people come back to me and show me,
[Guest]: send me stuff that I've written 2007. So I'm like, I don't even remember I've written this
[Guest]: stuff. And I've written something about guzzles. And so I look at that. And I'm like, Oh, my God,
[Guest]: this there is, you know, it's interesting that someone else is reading this stuff has given me,
[Guest]: but the magnification, like you said, compound interest, it is that something you've written
[Guest]: at a point in the past, survives enough to compound to everything else you've written
[Guest]: 10 years later, or 15 years later. So one of the things that people often, I think,
[Guest]: ignore is that this power of compounding does not come from doing for a purpose. That means,
[Guest]: if I had written that article on guzzles, to get 100,000 views, I didn't get 100,000 views at the
[Guest]: time. But when I write points to that article again today, after 10 or 12 years, when a similar
[Guest]: situation arises in the market again, people look back at it and say, wow, and you know,
[Guest]: then it gets the 100,000 views that it would have otherwise not gotten at all at the time. So I
[Guest]: think, you know, that this doing what you love, and then doing it for the purpose of getting it
[Guest]: right, getting it better, has enormous potential. And we've never seen I mean, I look at this and
[Guest]: say, you know what, we were talking about a few listed companies recently. They're trying to get
[Guest]: to smaller towns using influencers. This is insane. Because if you think of the traditional
[Guest]: concept, they would be like, oh, get a wholesaler, hire a bunch of distributors in each village,
[Guest]: the wholesaler, we parcel the inventory to the inventor, wholesaler then transfers it to the
[Guest]: and then each of the distributors have to order and they have to put some money down to get their
[Guest]: inventory going and they transition it to the shop. As an example, what they're doing right
[Guest]: now is saying, listen, what we'll do is we'll figure out whatever they want to buy. But how we
[Guest]: get to them is not by us putting paper ads and all that stuff. We're going to get people on YouTube
[Guest]: who use our products and demonstrate how these products are used now whether they're headphones
[Guest]: or lipstick or whatever it is, it's not relevant. But this is an audience you would just not go
[Guest]: after as a large FMCG company or a large company. You know what, how many people use lipstick in
[Guest]: these? So if they want to buy it, they just have to wait, because my supply chain is not going to
[Guest]: be strong enough. The difference now is suddenly everything is changing that ecosystem where you're
[Guest]: saying, listen, you want that lipstick, we'll deliver it to your house. Because somewhere along
[Guest]: the line, the whole logistics frameworks in India have gotten sorted out. So if you order from a
[Guest]: small village in Kerala, anything can get you, get that product over to you in two months directly
[Guest]: to your house. How do you even figure out which product to buy is you're now on YouTube. So you're
[Guest]: going to use authentic people to figure out the, when I say authentic, it's like, I don't have to
[Guest]: hire an Aamir Khan all the time. If I find another person who speaks my language, who looks like me,
[Guest]: and is a person that I associate with, and they like this product, I would rather, you know,
[Guest]: I would I would actually give them as much credence as me looking at a film star in into
[Guest]: buying a product. So the it empowers the creators who can then therefore find a revenue stream by,
[Guest]: you know, doing this. But it also empowers brands, which otherwise would have I mean, today, I keep
[Guest]: in the in the financial world, they keep telling us their brand is a moat. It's this moat that says,
[Guest]: well, you know what, if it's Nestle KitKat, then Nestle is Nestle and therefore it can't be broken.
[Guest]: Why is Nestle KitKat KitKat? Because they've done these ads on TV and people have used it and
[Guest]: but the product is just a wafer covered with chocolate. I can get better chocolate.
[Guest]: I can get better wafer. I can get a similar crunchy sounding feel with a better actual physical
[Guest]: product. The problem isn't that I have a better product, it was that I don't have the distribution
[Guest]: or the reach. Now you do. So if you build a product like that, you could get it to people
[Guest]: in a way that Nestle is going to be totally blindsided to, because their way of responding is
[Guest]: go to the IPL and put more ads, because that's how people are going to find my product. The other
[Guest]: person is going to be like, you know what, I am going to do a review of each IPL game on my YouTube
[Guest]: channel. And you know what, I'll talk about this new fancy KitKat competitor that is out there.
[Guest]: And both things have the same reach, except the TV guy, TV ad fellow is is paying 100x
[Guest]: for the same kind of reach as the influencer is who's just talking about IPL. It's just
[Guest]: incredible that this economy exists today, and that everybody can harness it. Today,
[Guest]: if one person talks about a product that I have built, it gives me more revenue than if I had put
[Guest]: an ad that said come buy my product. It's because people don't want to listen to come buy my product.
[Guest]: They want to listen to go buy his product. So that, I mean, this change, and I think the economic
[Guest]: change of the whole thing has so many ramifications. More and more people do this, and you have another
[Guest]: layer, which is the creator economy is great from an, you know, from an independence perspective.
[Guest]: But there is still not enough of a financial structure around. And I say this in my book,
[Guest]: actually talks about it, is you have to think of these things, because earlier, the governments of
[Guest]: the day or the companies of employers of the day would think about it for you. They would set up
[Guest]: your pension plan, your EPF. Now, what is the EPF? Part of your income gets automatically saved
[Guest]: somewhere. After 50 years, when you retire, you suddenly say, hey, what do I do? I don't have an
[Guest]: income anymore. Employer gratuitously says, listen, I've been putting 10% of your money in this thing.
[Guest]: And here's a big lump sum, go go spend it now. And you could look at them and says, thank you, you're
[Guest]: my saviour. This is the traditional way of thinking about it. But over time, people got more and more
[Guest]: intelligent people said, okay, the government said we can't fund our pension pensions endlessly.
[Guest]: You guys have to start thinking about your own retirement. Employers were forced more and more.
[Guest]: So right now, for instance, traditional employment, you have to put 10% of your income,
[Guest]: and the employer puts another 10% of your income, so 20% of your income goes to this fund, which you
[Guest]: can't touch until you retire or until you go out of a job. What is the equivalent for a creator?
[Guest]: Unless they plan it themselves, the creators, while they get the freedom, it isn't entirely
[Guest]: easy for them to build themselves a smarter financial retirement. Because like all jobs,
[Guest]: every creator, like all restaurants, perhaps, every creator will have a shelf life of some sort.
[Guest]: That shelf life, maybe because of topicality, I am famous for talking about something and that
[Guest]: something itself got violated. I faced that myself, there was a language called Delphi,
[Guest]: I used to be so fond of it as a programming language that we set up an India Delphi users
[Guest]: group and we did things I went to Borland in the US to Borland was the company that kind of that
[Guest]: kind of that owned Delphi at the time. I presented in international conferences, you search for
[Guest]: Delphi in India, you would get Deepak Chinoy and my company Agni and all that stuff, except Delphi
[Guest]: died. Delphi died, not because it was not a good product, it was just that the powerful competitors
[Guest]: had more marketing resources and better. In fact, the guy who built Delphi went on to go to Microsoft
[Guest]: and build even greater stuff over there, including the next bit of technologies that came out of
[Guest]: Microsoft, which have dominated it for the last 20 years. However, what happened there was my
[Guest]: creator influence. If I just sat the Delphi thing, I would have died. I would have had a good life
[Guest]: when I did but the shelf life. So what happens to the creators when their shelf life changes,
[Guest]: and the guy who used to do or the girl who used to do a video every single day at 9pm in the night
[Guest]: has a child and the 9pm is not possible. I mean, I can tell you from being a parent,
[Guest]: trying to commit to a 9pm lifestyle when you have a young child is altogether, at least in my case,
[Guest]: it was impossible to predict. I mean, maybe it's different for different people, but my children
[Guest]: taught me that the value of knowing when one can actually sleep, if it were traded as an NFT,
[Guest]: it would be one of the most valuable things in the world right now. So to be able to accurately
[Guest]: predict that, when you have a baby, it's different. So what happens then? Does your income
[Guest]: stream fall because the YouTube algorithm says, this person is no longer producing a 9pm video
[Guest]: every month, I'm going to downgrade their lifestyle or whatever it is. I think the
[Guest]: financial aspect of these extremes does need to be considered, apart from the social impact as
[Guest]: well. Because suddenly it's like the Amway problem. In Amway, once you become an Amway
[Guest]: distributor, suddenly all your friends start looking to you like customers. So you go to
[Guest]: their houses and you say, why aren't you using Amway toothpaste? I'll sell it to you. Suddenly
[Guest]: nobody wants to invite you to their house anymore because all you're talking about is Amway. Does
[Guest]: it happen in social media and creators? Maybe, I don't know. I'm just thinking that. Of course,
[Guest]: most of the time when I go out, I end up talking finance because that's what people want to talk
[Guest]: to me about. But I have more to say than finance, most of the time, though most of it is bad jokes,
[Guest]: so people would rather talk to me about finance. However, the interesting part of this is that,
[Guest]: where was I going with this? Yes, the issue that happens with a lot of the creator economies,
[Guest]: sometimes they feel that the backbones of the regular economy, which got built over time,
[Guest]: like the financial concept, the fact that Saturday and Sunday are a holiday, there's
[Guest]: a reason Saturday and Sunday are a holiday for many people, it's just because they needed to
[Guest]: get away, they needed to unwind. How do you unwind off being a creator? Because you're
[Guest]: always creating and you can always create because your mind will never rust. Therefore,
[Guest]: you could technically work seven hours a day, seven days a week, because you can. Now,
[Guest]: these constructs in the creator economy become what? Is it important? Is it like,
[Guest]: no, the world has changed, you have to work 24, I mean, you have to work seven days a week,
[Guest]: no matter what? Or is it like, is it true freedom saying, listen, it doesn't matter,
[Guest]: you can work one day a week, you don't have to conform to the norms as they are. But at the
[Guest]: same time, the norms are important, because if you choose to work seven days a week, that is
[Guest]: also a problem, because it will hurt you in the longer run.
[Amit Varma]: So great questions, great thoughts. Let me take a stab at kind of sharing my thoughts on it.
[Amit Varma]: But first, you know, that KitKat example, where I just want to point out that one thing advertisers
[Amit Varma]: don't realize, possibly because people and ad agencies are our age and all that, is that many
[Amit Varma]: young people don't even know, for them, KitKat is not a special thing. That brand resonance isn't
[Amit Varma]: there for them. That brand resonance is for an older generation. What I think people tend to
[Amit Varma]: miss is that look 60, 65, 70%, I don't know the exact number of India is born after liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: Right? So you and I have a sort of a shared reality, a shared basis for thinking about
[Amit Varma]: things that they may not share. There might be young people today for whom KitKat is nothing.
[Amit Varma]: There are certainly young people today on social media, for whom Amitabh Bachchan is just a guy
[Amit Varma]: who puts this weird numbers on his tweets, right? And that's what they know of the guy. And for
[Amit Varma]: them, he's famous for being famous, not for Diwaar or Sholay. Right? So we have to, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: different people think of the world in different ways. And that mainstream, there's no mainstream.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, this was a thought sparked by an interview of Steve Van Zandt, the guitarist who
[Amit Varma]: once said that rock was mainstream, really, between around the time of the Beatles and when
[Amit Varma]: Dylan went electric to Nirvana. And after that, there is no mainstream anymore. Everybody isn't
[Amit Varma]: listening to the same thing. Look, another thing that's changed. Back in the 90s, we all listened
[Amit Varma]: to the same thing. Right? Back in the 90s, we got our news from the same three or four places,
[Amit Varma]: there was a consensus on the truth. All of that is completely dissipated. And net-net,
[Amit Varma]: it's a great thing. Obviously, there are problems like polarization, the world of fake news,
[Amit Varma]: everything has become a narrative battle, whatever, big subject. But, you know, coming back
[Amit Varma]: to this whole sort of issue of how do creators think about thinking, this is a difficult problem.
[Amit Varma]: You know why? Because, and this is a problem that will be overcome when the ecosystem changes.
[Amit Varma]: So let me explain what I mean by that. Today, we are in a situation where a creator has to
[Amit Varma]: simultaneously be an entrepreneur. Right? So your one skill might be you're a creator,
[Amit Varma]: the other skill that you have to develop is you're an entrepreneur of your own brand.
[Amit Varma]: And then you kind of have to figure it out. Now, this, you know, and there are many human failings
[Amit Varma]: that come into play. Like when you were speaking, you were talking from the money aspect, and we'll
[Amit Varma]: talk more about your book soon. And these things will come up. But what is the reason that people
[Amit Varma]: don't make wise financial decisions for the future? It's because there is number one, of course,
[Amit Varma]: there is a fact that most people just don't understand money. It's not intuitive, you know,
[Amit Varma]: big numbers are too much. But there is also this illusion of immortality, where you don't in your
[Amit Varma]: mind, you don't come to terms with the fact that one day you might be weak and frail, and your
[Amit Varma]: memory might be passing, and you may not be what you are today. And your capacity to earn has gone
[Amit Varma]: down. Or you don't come to terms with your own mortality, for example. And the notion that like
[Amit Varma]: so many people don't take life insurance, because in a sense, they think they're going to live
[Amit Varma]: forever. And in your book, you, you know, argue at length that why you should depending on, you
[Amit Varma]: know, who you are and what your circumstances are. And there is also sort of this sense of continuity,
[Amit Varma]: like in my poker days, I would constantly remind myself and tell others that just because you're
[Amit Varma]: making a lot of money now, so you've got a lifestyle with it, don't assume that the flow
[Amit Varma]: of money will continue. You know, so then you get used to a lifestyle, you continue that lifestyle.
[Amit Varma]: And then one day, the flow ends, and you can't adjust and it becomes a problem. And you're right,
[Amit Varma]: creators do need to watch out for that. And because creators are not just at the mercy of
[Amit Varma]: changing fads, or what they do no longer being so relevant, they also have the mercy of algorithms
[Amit Varma]: by social media giants, that if suddenly an algorithm changes in some subtle way that
[Amit Varma]: downgrades your content, then that kind of becomes an issue. So I think this is a short term problem
[Amit Varma]: that creators need to think as entrepreneurs. But I think in the long run, an ecosystem will come
[Amit Varma]: about around this, where you will have intermediaries who will, you know, say that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, you're a creator, you don't have time to spend on marketing, or you don't have time to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, get brands who might want to advertise with you, you know, we'll take care of all that
[Amit Varma]: for you and all of that. And that ecosystem is going to kind of emerge. And you know, that's
[Amit Varma]: sort of bound to happen. So I'm not kind of so worried about that. But just to go back to and
[Amit Varma]: again, what you said about you have to do switch off, you look at someone like one of the most
[Amit Varma]: successful podcasters is this guy called Dan Carlin, who does a show called hardcore history,
[Amit Varma]: right? Like, first of all, it breaks every notion of what you might think about podcasts. Like,
[Amit Varma]: he did a series called a blueprint for Armageddon about World War One, which was 25 hours,
[Amit Varma]: five episodes of five hours each. And it's just him talking, no music, no sound effects, nothing,
[Amit Varma]: it's just him talking for 25 hours. And I remember the first time I went for a walk. And I was
[Amit Varma]: listening at a higher speed, obviously. And I started listening to one episode, not realizing
[Amit Varma]: the impact it will have on me. And obviously, it did wonders for my fitness, because that particular
[Amit Varma]: day, especially I just kept walking, I couldn't stop. I remember standing outside in the twilight
[Amit Varma]: as the sun is setting and is growing dark around me, just listening to this guy talking. And it's
[Amit Varma]: magical. And it is not presentation mode, where it's, you know, this happened after that. And on
[Amit Varma]: so and so date, this happened. It's very informal, it's rambling, he's thinking about something else.
[Amit Varma]: There's one really moving section, where this bunch of soldiers go into a battle and they all
[Amit Varma]: die. But the day before they go into battle, they write letters to their wives and girlfriends,
[Amit Varma]: and he's reading them out. Right? So it's incredible. You're standing in the twilight
[Amit Varma]: under your building, the sun is setting, and you're listening to this and you're transported.
[Amit Varma]: And this is history, but it's real again. Right? It is people who died, but it is people who are
[Amit Varma]: in your head. It's beautiful, the power of podcasting. And the reason I mentioned him is,
[Amit Varma]: he doesn't do this every day. He'll bring out one series a year or one series every one and a half
[Amit Varma]: years or whatever. And everybody binges and they just go mad. And you can't do this. If you're
[Amit Varma]: doing a 25 hour series. You can't do it weekly. You'll do it once a year. And he publishes all
[Amit Varma]: his resources and everything will be on his blog that these are the 80 books I read for this and
[Amit Varma]: everyone. So then people can go down rabbit holes and all of that. So what you're creating,
[Amit Varma]: the experience that you're creating, you can define for yourself. You don't have to think
[Amit Varma]: within fixed boundaries. You know, imagine him in the 90s, going to radio station or going to
[Amit Varma]: whoever and saying, I'll talk for 25 hours and they're like, fuck off, man. And you know, another
[Amit Varma]: example of that, which my friend Chuck Gopal introduced me to in the episode I did with him,
[Amit Varma]: is this lady called Miss Excel, right? Now, Miss Excel is this Instagrammer who has knowledge of
[Amit Varma]: Excel and a passion for EDM music, a passion for EDM and for dancing. She combined them, right?
[Amit Varma]: She was so she started bringing out these Instagram videos, where she's dancing to EDM.
[Amit Varma]: And on the top of the screen, there's an Excel problem being solved and you're shown how to
[Amit Varma]: do something. And people loved it. And she met all the rules. If she goes to a TV channel,
[Amit Varma]: and she says, I'll do this, they laugh her out of the room. But from my point of view,
[Amit Varma]: she met every parameter a creator needs to meet. It's authentic. She really cares about all three
[Amit Varma]: of these things. It's intimate. She is being who she is, and you appreciate that, right?
[Amit Varma]: And so on, meets every parameter. And you know, for a while, she was making $100,000 a day selling
[Amit Varma]: courses in Excel. Right? So here's someone who's made millions, definitely the richest Excel
[Amit Varma]: teacher in the world. A young woman dancing to EDM or doing other things to music and is delightful.
[Amit Varma]: Because she knows her shit. She really does know Excel. She's qualified to teach that's evident.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just so light and it's beautiful and it's wonderful. Right? And so it's for creators,
[Amit Varma]: it's unknown unknowns. And this is such a, you know, a fascinating time to be living in.
[Amit Varma]: Because one, I think creators will begin to explore all of these. Two, an ecosystem,
[Amit Varma]: a support ecosystem will obviously develop around them. And, you know, and the other thing is that
[Amit Varma]: back in the day, it was worse for creators, because either you make it to that top 0.5%,
[Amit Varma]: which makes all the money, or you get nothing. It's a labor of love. You know, like I say,
[Amit Varma]: the cafes of Versova where I live, are filled with actors who struggled for the last 30 years.
[Amit Varma]: It's sad, right? Everybody doesn't make it the top. But here in the creator economy,
[Amit Varma]: there are all kinds of niches, which don't even interact with each other.
[Amit Varma]: Where a superstar in one niche may pass a superstar in another niche on the street,
[Amit Varma]: and they may not recognize each other and their fans may not know each other, but they're big
[Amit Varma]: stars. You know, so it's, so in that sense, there are more opportunities, there are more and you
[Amit Varma]: know, I just feel that, I mean, obviously, the role of luck is huge in life, but it's a little
[Amit Varma]: less in this, your probability of making it if you're true to yourself, and you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: continue working on your craft and do work that you enjoy doing, the probability of your making
[Guest]: it is a bit much greater. This, you know, this is fascinating. From a perspective,
[Guest]: also, I keep thinking about this. How come India is defined by the lack of enough niches? I mean,
[Guest]: it's not defined by it, but it seems to have come across when everything about India is so big,
[Guest]: that every niche is huge, is probably a country of its own. So, you end up with, you know, so,
[Guest]: like, you know, how come cricket is our number one sport? In the South, volleyball isn't
[Guest]: insanely popular. I mean, there's a volleyball league also that's going on. Perhaps it's only
[Guest]: time that, you know, the other sports come in. And, you know, a country like Canada is like
[Guest]: three sports. I mean, three large sports. India is maybe once in a while we get a tennis player
[Guest]: or a badminton player and we, you know, or a set of badminton players. But otherwise,
[Guest]: this isn't that much in India that's, you know, talked about. So, the creator economy, I think,
[Guest]: for one, is what will change it. Because all the mainstream channels are like, listen,
[Guest]: we want to get to 90% of the population or 80% of the population. I don't care if 10%
[Guest]: of India's population is as much as France. They're like, no, no, we don't, we don't give
[Guest]: a damn. That does not matter to us. What matters to us is that I want, I want to get to 80% of
[Guest]: India. So, you know, this was for me fascinating because, again, it goes back to college when I
[Guest]: discovered this. Till I was in college, all I was listening to was English music and Hindi music,
[Guest]: for the most part. And English music was largely pop, some rock, some friends introduced me to
[Guest]: metal, which I pretended to understand, but didn't. And then I would, I went to college. And
[Guest]: then I discovered this thing called A.R. Rahman and Tamil and Telugu music, and even a bunch of
[Guest]: other genres as well, which I had no idea. Now, I did not know, for instance, that the audiography
[Guest]: of the beat and the thing of Tamil music was insanely good. I mean, way better than anything
[Guest]: I'd heard in Bollywood music, at least so far. And I was like, wow, this is amazing. The fact
[Guest]: that I was exposed to it at that time, told me that there was more, you know, much more out there
[Guest]: than I had ever seen. I saw what rock really was. Till that time, Pink Floyd was, I think,
[Guest]: that another brick in the wall. But then you heard the whole albums, and then you said, okay,
[Guest]: this is a different beast. Each one is a each set of albums, or each album is a different thought
[Guest]: process altogether. So, the discovery of these things, changed perception, at least in my own
[Guest]: head. And I think that's happening now. It's like you're starting to, hang on, is this something
[Guest]: that I can think about? Right now, I can think of about at least 20 or 30 topics that I've discovered
[Guest]: almost entirely because someone has taken the time, including, let's say, in your interviews
[Guest]: and podcasts, you might have not wanted the podcast to go there. But it turns out that it is
[Guest]: because the person on the other side or the conversation that you have brought about this
[Guest]: intensely interesting piece of information, that is a rabbit hole by itself. And as a listener,
[Guest]: while you may not have gone down that rabbit hole, it takes me down that rabbit hole in the sense,
[Guest]: it says, okay, well, I can do this. Sometimes, you know, it's bits and pieces of different things as
[Guest]: well. So, one of the things that fascinated me a lot, or continues to fascinate me is energy,
[Guest]: you know, as a as a whole, and how we consume it and how I keep thinking about this and saying,
[Guest]: you know what, we've, we've started to move and this is my engineer, me speaking, we started to
[Guest]: move slowly from what used to be an alternating current, current based setup, which is largely
[Guest]: your earlier while our lights, your fans and stuff, to LED lights and LED TV and LED charger,
[Guest]: I mean, and digital chargers and TVs, and so on, all of which actually require DC power.
[Guest]: So, you send AC through the wire, and then use a DC converter to charge your and you want much
[Guest]: lower voltage for it, you don't need the 220 volts, more and more devices go down this this hole.
[Guest]: But, you know, it I realized this, it's not like the mainstream media is making all this stuff up,
[Guest]: it's somewhere somebody started to talk about something and something. So, it's the picture
[Guest]: started to build in my mind that today, you could have a house built entirely out of DC power,
[Guest]: almost, other than maybe your fridge, you could go off grid, which means you have a solar power
[Guest]: thing. So, solar power, it's stored in batteries as DC, you have to actually convert it to AC to
[Guest]: be able to use it. But if you kept it as DC and power your devices directly, you might not need
[Guest]: as much power as you think you do, because the size and scale of the batteries required to run
[Guest]: some convert something to AC is much higher than if you were to directly use the DC.
[Guest]: This is interesting, because you could go off grid almost entirely.
[Guest]: Then what happens to the grid? They spend so much money and time building saying,
[Guest]: oh, we have electrified our villages. And you go to the next village and say, screw you guys,
[Guest]: we're already electrified. Because we have the solar power, we have the batteries,
[Guest]: and we've been running this for the last decade. And everybody's looking at each other and saying,
[Guest]: but we never drew our lines. What happens to all the money that we spent drawing lines to
[Guest]: this stupid village because we thought it's not electrified? Worse, what if people in the city
[Guest]: started to do this for themselves and said, forget it, we're not using the main grid anymore.
[Guest]: All these discoms and the, you know, the distribution companies, what happens to them?
[Guest]: And this is not me speaking. I mean, this is me speaking right now. But it's a confluence of ideas
[Guest]: I've started to look around and saying, okay, this guy is asking that question. I'm just putting the
[Guest]: points together. I don't think I would have had this as an original thought, just by myself.
[Guest]: It's got to have been all the influences that I've got, maybe bits and pieces over the years,
[Guest]: that that jigsaw puzzle starts to come into place. And suddenly I find there's a gaping hole over
[Guest]: there. It's like, I'll give you the, you know, for instance, you can't stop running a power plant,
[Guest]: which is made of coal or natural gas. It's a lot of effort. If solar power were to take over,
[Guest]: in a way, power is consumed as soon as it's generated. We don't have the battery capacity
[Guest]: to store power at that level. So every time you generate the power, it's the same time that it is
[Guest]: consumed. If solar power works in the day, my availability of my power in the day is 50 gigawatts,
[Guest]: but in the night it's 20. So to make up for the night, if my power requirements are 30 gigawatts,
[Guest]: for the night, I need that extra 10 gigawatts to come from somewhere, you know, so not from solar.
[Guest]: Can I run power plants only at night? The answer is, are you freaking kidding me? You can't.
[Guest]: The natural gas power plant will have to be run for most of the day. Otherwise,
[Guest]: you have to change that technology. Suddenly you have a problem because if you keep giving
[Guest]: impetus to solar power, in the day your power costs will be so low that certain power companies
[Guest]: will go bankrupt. And in the night, power costs will be so high because solar power isn't there.
[Guest]: You don't know how to marry these two in any meaningful way unless you actually store power.
[Guest]: And storing power is a nuclear physicist level problem right now in the sense of
[Guest]: storing power at that magnitude. It's an interesting problem to have. And the reason
[Guest]: that I have it as a thought process also is simply because there are so many of these things I have
[Guest]: seen, these pieces that I've seen, and some of them are comedy. Some of them have probably
[Guest]: mentioned this in some comic, you know, there are these people who kind of do physics, like you said,
[Guest]: Miss Excel, there's Miss Macroeconomics in a way, who come and do these complex macroeconomics
[Guest]: topics. And then they put this into like this really funny video, that after you finish the
[Guest]: video and saying, I had a good laugh, but this is a real problem. I find it fascinating that the
[Guest]: creative creator economy opens our eyes into these, these, you know, these crazy levels of things,
[Guest]: which for a mainstream media to have actually addressed would be get 15 people who are PhDs,
[Guest]: get each of their opinions on the problem. So you would not go to random person on internet who
[Guest]: perhaps has about 5% of an idea on this. And this is the interesting part, and I think you and I
[Guest]: gel on this. There is no longer a call to authority that works on the internet, which means
[Guest]: you could be a nobody, a Joe Rogan, and comment on something that you don't have a degree in,
[Guest]: simply because you have enough of a context to make a voice. And people will not grudge you that,
[Guest]: of course, some people will grudge you that forever, but not enough people and people will
[Guest]: give you a chance. Whereas in the olden world, you wouldn't even get the podium to stand and speak on.
[Guest]: What changes because this, this is this thing is remarkable from a perspective of, you know,
[Guest]: equality, equality, democratizing, also a lot of noise, because now everybody's an expert on
[Guest]: protein covered with something that spike protein. Yeah, that's the word. Everybody knows what spike
[Guest]: protein is and how it works, which is not necessarily a good thing. But at some level,
[Guest]: at some level, this democracy is is helpful, because if it, it changes, if it helps change
[Guest]: the world in a little way, that little way will magnify to give compounding effects in the future.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to touch on various aspects of this, like, in our last episode, I think we discussed
[Amit Varma]: nuclear power a little bit, which I think is the one big solution, which makes much of this more.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, I loved your framework. I love the phrase, I've written it down,
[Amit Varma]: what happens to the grid, because I think as a framework, it works across so many things,
[Amit Varma]: and it works on in the creator economy, right? Now, what you were earlier saying about niches
[Amit Varma]: not being recognized, you know, so in the 90s, what used to happen, and I worked for a while,
[Amit Varma]: they're in channel V and MTV, and so on. And in the 90s, there was this thing where
[Amit Varma]: multinationals would come to India, and they would think that India is Bollywood and cricket
[Amit Varma]: to Joby can now you make your marketing your advertising around Bollywood and cricket,
[Amit Varma]: and that's it. And that's all they knew. And then over a period of time, there was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: some nuance kind of crept in. Now, what I have seen recently is a lot of new entrants into the
[Amit Varma]: space came with this whole mindset. Like, you know, Audible started this podcasting this thing
[Amit Varma]: called Audible Suno briefly, and Spotify came in here as well. And they came with the same mindset,
[Amit Varma]: even Netflix has that, that Bollywood is everything. So Netflix is not coming here and
[Amit Varma]: saying, Okay, you know, let's look at the whole creator ecosystem. They're saying let's go to
[Amit Varma]: Karan Johar, or let's go to big Bollywood names. And that's it. You know, when Audible Suno came,
[Amit Varma]: I pitched a couple of shows to them at the time and the scene and the unseen even then was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, doing pretty well. But the person I met there had been hired from Zee. And forget me,
[Amit Varma]: she hadn't heard of Joe Rogan. Right. And she said, I don't listen to podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And they commissioned a bunch of filmy shows and they commissioned a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: shit which was based around celebrities. Now the point is those big names will get you initial
[Amit Varma]: numbers, but they won't get you the depth of engagement, because they are not because the
[Amit Varma]: content is shallow, right? They won't give you that intimate economy field, that intimate creator
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem field. The smart way for these big companies to think about it would be to say,
[Amit Varma]: what can we do to enable an ecosystem, where the best creators rise to the top,
[Amit Varma]: where we can look for authentic voices, like this, in a sense is a kind of thinking,
[Amit Varma]: which is skeuomorphic. Have you heard the term? Skeuomorphic. Skeuomorphic. So in design,
[Amit Varma]: skeuomorphic is used as you are using a design from one paradigm in a separate paradigm to make
[Amit Varma]: people comfortable with it. For example, when Apple had their ebooks app, in I think the late
[Amit Varma]: aughties, you know, it looked like a bookshelf on the screen. Right? So people who want to read
[Amit Varma]: books, you're giving them an artifact from the past and making that the visual representation.
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of how it looks like, like there are some music mixing softwares,
[Amit Varma]: where you will actually the software will have these knobs, which you can turn.
[Unknown]: Yeah, right.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't actually need that. But it's just to make people comfortable with because they're
[Amit Varma]: used to it. Now, I think that marketers in the mainstream media, increasingly think of the not
[Amit Varma]: increasingly the forever thought of the world in this skeuomorphic ways, where if there is something
[Amit Varma]: that comes up that they don't understand, they want to fit in, into their pre existing conceptions
[Amit Varma]: of what is kind of going on there going on in the scene. And I think this is you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I think this doesn't matter. Like I'm a creator, it doesn't bother me, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it doesn't bother me at all. I had pitched stuff to Spotify as well. They also,
[Amit Varma]: they were just more into celeb names and all that. I keep saying Audible,
[Amit Varma]: Suno was about Bollywood, Spotify is about Bandra. It's just, but it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so they can do whatever content that they want, and eventually, you know,
[Amit Varma]: shit settles down. But the point is, thankfully, the creator economy has gotten to the point
[Amit Varma]: where we don't need these people anymore. Right? And creators everywhere get this.
[Amit Varma]: And there's kind of a period of time and some of them will figure it out, right? Like, and some of
[Amit Varma]: them won't. So Kodak didn't figure it out, for example, and they're not there. Netflix figured
[Amit Varma]: it out. They started as DVD rentals. Right? And but they figured it out. So some people will figure
[Amit Varma]: it out. Some people won't and it doesn't really bother me. And as far as you know, what you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned about, you know, you mentioned Joe Rogan. Now, the thing with Rogan here is this,
[Amit Varma]: that number one, I don't even know why he signed the Spotify deal. He's already, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he transcended that space. You know, whatever one thinks of him, you know, I could give him a few
[Amit Varma]: tips on craft, but whatever one thinks of him, he transcended that space and did some things really
[Amit Varma]: well. And he didn't need to do that. But the important thing here is this in terms of principle
[Amit Varma]: and why I agree with you that the increased democratization is a good thing. And that
[Amit Varma]: people like him are uncancellable. That today, you may disagree with Joe Rogan and say,
[Amit Varma]: Rogan and say that, oh, he's siding with the anti-vaxxers or he's got this idiot called Malone
[Amit Varma]: on a show who's talking nonsense. And, you know, de-platform him. Today, you may say that. Today,
[Amit Varma]: you may disagree with Rogan. But tomorrow, somebody you agree with, the same principle
[Amit Varma]: will apply. Right? You know, what will the tech giants go by? The tech giants will either go by
[Amit Varma]: the prevailing politics of the day as they might be within the company, or by the government of
[Amit Varma]: the day and what the state in each country tells them to do. You know, so today, if you're a liberal
[Amit Varma]: in India, saying that, oh, he's an anti-vaxxer, and he's this and shut him up. Tomorrow, Adityanath
[Amit Varma]: will apply the same principle to shut your ass down. Right? So what you got to do is you got to
[Amit Varma]: stand up for principles. And the principle there is free speech and the principle there is whatever
[Amit Varma]: and in this whole fracas, by the way, I think everyone behaved appropriately. You know, Neil
[Amit Varma]: Young and Joni Mitchell, both of whose music I love and listen to much more than to Rogan,
[Amit Varma]: were entitled to make a stand and take their music out, you know, more power to them standing
[Amit Varma]: up for principles. Spotify also was entitled to say that, no, we'll keep this guy on our platform,
[Amit Varma]: you know, though, I think they should have been more firm about it and reiterated the principle
[Amit Varma]: behind the whole thing. And so yeah, it's kind of an interesting sort of case. But I just don't
[Guest]: know why he signed with Spotify. In fact, one thing that I do want to say over here is he had
[Guest]: about 200 million downloads a month before he started. Yeah, Spotify and Spotify now has 400
[Guest]: million dollars of downloads a month, which I think is a is weird because he's half of Spotify
[Guest]: in terms of downloads or is it but the point isn't that the point is, you can't cancel Joe Rogan.
[Guest]: Because earlier, you could shut a person down, you could shut a person down by going to his
[Guest]: employer and saying shut him down. He should not be allowed to say what he wants to say.
[Guest]: You can't do that with Joe Rogan anymore. If you take him out of Spotify, they will still be a
[Guest]: Joe Rogan that is intensely popular, and so popular that you would now no longer have anywhere
[Guest]: else to go, you literally have to go to the internet to shut them down. You have to go to
[Guest]: Google and say when people search for him, stop showing his show, at which point they will be
[Guest]: an competitor to Google will show them and people will still find this is insane. Because I mean,
[Guest]: I'd learned this in Dream 11. Dream 11 app apparently was not available on the App Store
[Guest]: because it was akin to whatever gambling or whatever it was. So people found a way to install
[Guest]: it on their Android phones. I'm like, you know, you couldn't say this to a person saying if you're
[Guest]: if I'm not on the App Store, am I finished? The answer is no. With appropriate popularity,
[Guest]: you can get people to bypass what the traditional way was to access your application,
[Guest]: which is go to the App Store and search for it. To I have an app over here, please download it
[Guest]: to this setting in your phone, allow external apps to be run and then let run this separately.
[Guest]: Enough people ran it simply because it was an app that was immensely popular.
[Guest]: You can't you couldn't cancel the app, it had enough money behind it. But now you can't cancel
[Guest]: a voice because the voice will find a way to get to you. Regardless, I mean, you could cancel it by
[Guest]: you know, putting the person in jail. Of course, that that can happen. But I'm just saying that
[Guest]: this concept of a popular notion of saying 50% of the people are for something and 50% are against,
[Guest]: but the against people are louder. And therefore, we, they should be allowed to shut this person
[Guest]: down. I don't think that happens anymore. It's very clear, which is very huge. I don't think
[Guest]: anybody could shut down Amit Verma for meeting, I don't know, a person who had an alternative view
[Guest]: about science, religion, technology, whatever, or who came and said, of course, you can cancel
[Guest]: the grid, all the discoms ought to be bankrupt. Can the discoms go to the government and say,
[Guest]: shut Amit Verma down? I don't think they can. I don't think they should be allowed to.
[Guest]: And it's more power to the creator economy because if Amit Verma was on a Wall Street Journal,
[Guest]: that Wall Street Journal could have stopped your column.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, a number of points. And by the way, the Ministry of Ayush once complained to Times
[Amit Varma]: of India about a column I wrote, where I really shat on the Ministry of Ayush,
[Amit Varma]: and they demanded an apology. And my literate DOI called me and she was quite amused and she said,
[Amit Varma]: what do you want to do? And I said, I can double down, no way I'm ever apologizing. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: I didn't and I wasn't cancelled. But there's a disturbing nuance here, which is that yes,
[Amit Varma]: Joe Rogan is too big to be cancelled. But he's too big. That's why, you know, if you're much
[Amit Varma]: smaller, if you're somebody starting out, if you need to do 200 videos before you become good and
[Amit Varma]: you reach that level, and early on, you don't agree with whatever the consensus is, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's right wing or left wing or whatever, and you're shut down, you know, for that reason,
[Amit Varma]: then or you censor yourself and you just stop for that reason, because the environment is too noisy.
[Amit Varma]: That becomes a problem. I mean, I don't even, you know, that 50-50 formulation you made,
[Amit Varma]: I don't agree with it. I think only three or 4% of the people are strident and loud and go into
[Amit Varma]: this. You have a vocal minority, which is really small and a silent majority, which either doesn't
[Amit Varma]: give a shit, or they're like, you know, let 1000 flowers blossom. But a silent minority is kind of
[Amit Varma]: an illustration of this is Dave Chappelle, where, you know, there was such an outcry when his last
[Amit Varma]: special came out, but you go to Rotten Tomatoes and you see the rating, you know, and there is
[Amit Varma]: no doubt it was last I checked 97.5% or whatever, adored by the vast masses of people. Now a few
[Amit Varma]: random people will do their thing and that's okay. The worry is that these manic silent,
[Amit Varma]: these manic vocal minorities might sometimes, you know, have, yeah, you know, people will just say,
[Guest]: you know, why get into this, you know? Yeah, especially I mean, if you like, for instance,
[Guest]: if Neil Young, for instance, who's, who's universally liked, I think, takes a stand,
[Guest]: it almost makes you feel that Joe Rogan must be doing something really stupid.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the interesting thing there is that two artists I greatly admire,
[Amit Varma]: to my great dismay, took a stand last year, which I didn't agree with, which is Eric Clapton and Van
[Amit Varma]: Morrison, and I adore Van Morrison. You know, a lot of some of his music is like the soundtrack
[Amit Varma]: to my growing up years. And they came out as hardcore anti-maskers and anti-vaxxers and all
[Amit Varma]: that. And it's so sort of, but that consolidated my case for separating the art from the artist.
[Amit Varma]: I love their music. But now the guy is behaving like a, you know, whatever, and they're wrong,
[Amit Varma]: but it is what it is. Right? So it's not as if all the artists are necessarily on one side on this.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, a Neil Young versus Eric Clapton mud fight or something would kind of be fun. But,
[Amit Varma]: but yeah, on the whole, you want diverse voices to flourish. But then the worry there is the tyranny
[Amit Varma]: of the social media algorithms, because the fact of the matter, and that's a whole separate problem
[Amit Varma]: we could talk for five hours about, is that you have these social media behemoths like your
[Amit Varma]: Facebook and your Twitter and your Google, which have way too much power, which have way too much
[Amit Varma]: power. So what you want to democratize, also, is that kind of access where artists aren't
[Amit Varma]: necessarily dependent on them, that if they run afoul of the YouTube algorithm, for whatever reason,
[Amit Varma]: they're kind of cut out of it, right? Now, what I have built is that whatever audience like my
[Amit Varma]: thing comes on all podcast apps, I'm not dependent on algorithms for discovery. The audience I have
[Amit Varma]: this the audience I have, and it spreads by word of mouth and is grown organically. So I'm lucky
[Amit Varma]: enough to get to that stage where, you know, that is there. But if you're just starting out,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and the algorithms are doing whatever the hell they're doing, then what do you do on
[Amit Varma]: Facebook, for example, I just have a, it's like very personal, Twitter is where I broadcast,
[Amit Varma]: Facebook is just kind of family and friends and all of that. But there every time, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just as I post a link to my podcast on Twitter, I post them on Facebook, and nobody notices because
[Amit Varma]: their algo downgrades links, if you put a link, it will not show up on somebody's timeline. So
[Amit Varma]: yeah, if you put a photo, it will, but only if you don't post a link with it. So what many people
[Amit Varma]: will do is they'll post a photo, and they'll say link in the first comment and they'll put the link
[Amit Varma]: there. And I don't give a damn, I just whatever I post on Twitter, I posted there, I know there'll
[Amit Varma]: be like four likes, and I don't I don't kind of care about that. But that shows you that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that artists should not have to think about algorithms and have to cater to that. And
[Amit Varma]: there'll be YouTube courses, which will teach you how to sort of, you know, sort of weave your
[Amit Varma]: content and all the things that you do in the headline that you give, and the image that you
[Amit Varma]: use so that, you know, and the frequency with which you post. And I, you know, and I'm probably
[Amit Varma]: a bit extreme in this kind of idealism, but I just want to do my whatever I do, without thinking of
[Amit Varma]: any of these things, that, you know, if I'm recording a conversation, I want to record the
[Amit Varma]: conversation I most enjoy having, and not think how to market it, and how will an algo push it
[Guest]: and all that. But that's a bit of an interesting that you say that, because one of the things that
[Guest]: people told me when I started off writing at Capital Mind was that Deepak, you have to focus
[Guest]: on SEO. So being lazy as I was, I said, I have two things to do, might I have a limited amount
[Guest]: of time, one, I can learn more about finance and write it, or I can learn about SEO. I chose to
[Guest]: learn about finance and write it. And of course, that was interesting that I went, what happened
[Guest]: to this SEO stuff was quite interesting. So in the process of doing this, people had figured out
[Guest]: Google's algorithms around text. So they said, you know what, this is what you should write,
[Guest]: the headline should have these keywords and something, search for the keyword before you
[Guest]: write the content. And I'm like, yeah, yeah, I will, I need to figure out what I want to write
[Guest]: about. And I want to write about that. And this may be an esoteric, very boring topic, like
[Guest]: how does RBI pump money into the economy, which is a great headline to have because you read that
[Guest]: and then you read the content and you're like, oh my god, this is really boring. So how do I make
[Guest]: it exciting. So I'm going to use my Abeyars and I'm going to use my other ways to keep the audience
[Guest]: at least hooked up to a point where I can say you've read enough to answer a few questions
[Guest]: if you're asked about it at parties. But beyond this, I am not willing to do an SEO work that
[Guest]: says, you know what, put the word RBI 17 times so that when people search for RBI, Google says your
[Guest]: RBI. So I was doing this normally. But then somewhere along and I think 2010 or 2011,
[Guest]: Google changed its algorithm. It suddenly decided that people who are tricking its algorithm into
[Guest]: bringing their pages to the forefront are going to get penalized. And people suddenly lost a
[Guest]: very large amount of traffic and I would get people in the finance area, which is a bunch of
[Guest]: people in the same area that I was complaining saying, listen, we've lost all I'm not getting
[Guest]: enough. It's I'm looking my hits and I'm like, they're the same or they're growing. And it turns
[Guest]: out that because I was not using any of these SEO techniques, I saw nothing change in that algorithm.
[Guest]: And therefore I was not a slave to it. Of course, I may I will still be a slave to it in some way.
[Guest]: But I was getting the compounding effect that because now when people start searching for the
[Guest]: same content, I didn't have as much competition, I was getting highlighted a lot more. I think
[Guest]: this is going to happen with the algos that you mentioned on YouTube and Facebook also.
[Guest]: Facebook, of course, there is an evil nature to it, which is that they tell you that listen,
[Guest]: you're no longer going to be organic because you aren't paying us. So if you paid us,
[Guest]: then maybe we would show you some more we'd show you to a bunch of more of your friends.
[Guest]: And you're like, dude, I built this community on Facebook. That means all these people follow me
[Guest]: for me. And now you're telling me I need to pay to get to the same people, which sounds a little
[Guest]: obscene. But that's fine. It's a platform by itself, you learn, you live to learn and so on.
[Guest]: But over time, I think like what you've done is build a community on so many platforms,
[Guest]: that if one platform through its weight around, you would not get impacted. Of course,
[Guest]: they're eventually all slaves to at least a few of these at some point.
[Amit Varma]: No, I think what I managed to do and what not everyone can do, and I kind of
[Amit Varma]: lucked into it. And I'm probably the kind of person who I was like, I don't care about money,
[Amit Varma]: I don't care, I'll just do what I do. And whatever following that I have,
[Amit Varma]: has nothing to do with an algorithm. The discovery is not algorithm, the discovery is always word of
[Amit Varma]: mouth, or some friend said, hey, this episode is great, and you listen to it, and it becomes a
[Amit Varma]: habit and all of that. And so therefore, I'm freed of the algorithm. Now the point is, if I was a
[Amit Varma]: really savvy marketing person, if I understood all of this, could I get more people to listen,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps, but then the point is that part of my mental bandwidth would go there. And I just want
[Amit Varma]: 100% of my mental bandwidth to go into this. You know, if I'm going to talk to you, and I have say
[Amit Varma]: 20 hours, I want to spend 20 hours in prepping for talking to you and then have the hopefully
[Amit Varma]: five hour plus conversation which this can become. I don't want to spend 10 hours out of that
[Amit Varma]: thinking is algorithm. I don't want to do that. Whatever shit Yeah, because I think then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's that's an endless game you are playing because any algorithm can be gamed.
[Amit Varma]: But as people figure out the way to game it, the algorithm will change. And that's an endless race
[Amit Varma]: you can get into. And I'm like, No, man, like I idealistically say a good product is a best
[Amit Varma]: marketing. Just do something that makes people you know, recommend what you're doing to other people
[Amit Varma]: that makes people you know, make you a habit and and so enter their comfort zones. And but,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's easy for me to say that having reached a stage where but if you're starting out
[Amit Varma]: today, then it's so confusing for a young creator and my advice would still remain that just do what
[Amit Varma]: you love and do it often and don't care too much about validation and eventually shit works out.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of work is good and worth doing for its own sake.
[Guest]: In fact, that is the most difficult thing you can ever teach somebody is like do it now. They
[Guest]: will not come now. Yeah, they will come later. And the problem is build it and they will come
[Guest]: almost says as soon as I finish building it, they will start coming. Whereas I'm saying just keep
[Guest]: building it. And they will keep coming. Eventually, it's not it's it's a difficult conversation to have
[Guest]: because you're talking delayed gratification of someone's work. Because when I work, I get a salary
[Guest]: at the end of the month. It's instant gratification in that context, right. But when I'm building a
[Guest]: business, I'm going to struggle, struggle, struggle for three years. And somebody told me this, you
[Guest]: know, this is saying that for the first three years, don't ask me about profit or what I get out
[Guest]: of the business. After three years, ask only what I get out of the business. That means your first
[Guest]: three years are built in only building a flywheel that generates revenue. After three years, you can
[Guest]: optimize it and build whatever. So maybe it may take five years in this case. But in a day when
[Guest]: you're watching content that's only three days old, five years sounds like yeah, what is wrong
[Amit Varma]: with this guy is like, my credo like, you know, when Shruti Rajgopalan, our friend asked me about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, she was starting her podcast ideas of India back in the day. And she had long
[Amit Varma]: conversations with me about what it should be like and all of that. And I gave her much of
[Amit Varma]: this advice. But one of the things I said, was that when I conceived of the scene in the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: I conceived of it as not just reaching across space in terms of geography, people listen to
[Amit Varma]: me from everywhere, but reaching across time. So if you listen to it in 2030, it is still valuable
[Amit Varma]: to you. So my advice to her was that when you're thinking about the kind of content you want to do,
[Amit Varma]: don't think about what someone listening to episode one is going to hear. Think about what
[Amit Varma]: somebody discovering you at episode 100 will binge on. Right. And when you think about it like that,
[Amit Varma]: that changes everything. Right. And speaking of the long term, I think now it's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of your book, Money Wise, Timeless Lessons on Building Wealth, which I enjoyed reading so
[Amit Varma]: much. And I sometimes I worry if I'm too old to benefit from the advice. So you have, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a section addressing just that, and you say I'm not so you know, and that takes a long term view
[Amit Varma]: as well. And you know, let's take a quick commercial break. And when we come back,
[Amit Varma]: I have so many questions to ask you about that.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150. And registration is now open for
[Amit Varma]: my April 2022 cohort. The first webinar is on Saturday, April 9. So if you're interested,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent,
[Amit Varma]: just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Guest]: I can help you. Welcome back Amit to the scene and unseen.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no, Deepak, you're getting confused. Welcome back to the Capital Mind podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so this is our grand crossover. And before the break, we spoke about middle age and
[Amit Varma]: the creator economy, both subjects I know a little bit about having participated in both of them.
[Amit Varma]: And as of you, in fact, but now we're going to talk about a subject in which you are absolutely
[Amit Varma]: the expert. And, and I'm fascinated by and I'm trying to learn about it. And that, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is your brilliant book Money Wise, which, you know, tells people how to approach their money,
[Amit Varma]: and just demystifies that completely and breaks it down. Before we get to the book itself,
[Amit Varma]: tell me about where did the idea of the book come from? Like, when did you think of the book? And
[Amit Varma]: when you thought of the book? Like, were there any models that you looked at any previous books,
[Amit Varma]: which were on in the same territory? You know, what? How did that? How did the book evolve?
[Guest]: So this is interesting, because the book itself has been thought process in the last maybe five
[Guest]: to six years. In fact, the first time I started talking about a book of this sort, was to a
[Guest]: publisher in 2014. Roughly, that's the first time I had a conversation. And then I wasn't very sure
[Guest]: that I could do it at the time. And I didn't feel that I had enough to write about. And I wanted to
[Guest]: write about a slightly different topic at the time. And it's chapter in this book, that I think
[Guest]: deserves to be a book by itself. It's called Suckered. So the idea being, you know, all the
[Guest]: scams that have happened and all that stuff, but there wasn't that much of meeting of minds there.
[Guest]: And I didn't think I had enough, enough material. But you can always trust scams. So we've had about
[Guest]: five or six since then. We then I said, Okay, maybe I should go on this on my own to try and
[Guest]: at least write the book. And, but what actually happened was interesting. In the pandemic,
[Guest]: I was at home, there was enough time because at your lockdown, so it's all you can do is
[Guest]: you have a lot of thoughts, you can put this together. Chiki at Juggernaut, you know,
[Guest]: we there was a common connection, she knew her and then, you know, which he introduced us and
[Guest]: then we started talking and she looked at a piece couple of pieces of the writing. And she said,
[Guest]: Okay, I'm this is a great idea to write a book on the Suckered topic. But just to start to get
[Guest]: this together. And I said, Okay, let me get the material together. I started putting it together.
[Guest]: She then said, the I mean, this was just about before the pandemic is when all our conversations
[Guest]: started to happen. And then she said, Deepak, there's a problem in the pandemic here. You're
[Guest]: seeing people want to invest, but they don't have the ability to why don't you write something that
[Guest]: helps the person who doesn't really know about finance. And that's more challenging for me,
[Guest]: because if you don't know anything about finance, I can't use half the jargon I use. So
[Guest]: how do I make it sound interesting, and yet it should have enough information and enough depth
[Guest]: for someone to be able to get out of this and say, Listen, I've got something that's good,
[Guest]: good enough for me to at least start. It took a while because it I did the first round of writing,
[Guest]: I had a bunch of articles of my own from the past, which was we have about 5000 articles on
[Guest]: Capital Mind. So some of them are timeless, in the sense of having, you know, talked about a
[Guest]: lot of this from the very basics. But more importantly, I had to write this in a in a
[Guest]: way that was kind of structured to read as a book. So it was different chapters. So I started off
[Guest]: with something and then I had to start off with the very basics, which was, which was more of the
[Guest]: element of so you come to start thinking about stock markets, if I invest, I put my money in,
[Guest]: and I instantly make some money that comes out of it. And sometimes I can put 100,000 rupees in and
[Guest]: get 125,000 rupees, so I make 25. So that's the thought process that goes in. The problem is,
[Guest]: we shouldn't think of finance that way. So I had a different thought process around it a lot of
[Guest]: myths around these things, I had to break them down first saying this, and you can start investing
[Guest]: whenever you want, you just have to be disciplined at the concept, you need to understand that there
[Guest]: are different types of instruments, different type of vehicles and different types of approaches you
[Guest]: can take to the market. But before you get there, but to stock market investing and all that you
[Guest]: have to fix some hygiene elements first. Once you start to build that out into the flesh it out
[Guest]: properly. In fact, once I did this Devangshu, you know, we both know we he actually took a look and
[Guest]: then removed all the stuff that wasn't the book. So effectively, it's like, you know, you how do
[Guest]: you make a elephant sculpture, you find a piece of rock and remove the stuff that isn't the elephant.
[Guest]: So DD actually helped kind of break it all down. But in the process, I found that I repeat the same
[Guest]: joke at least two times in the book, because I'd written the two parts at different points. I've
[Guest]: forgotten I'd written that, you know, so you all the stuff I kind of went away. But also, you know,
[Guest]: then later, of course, they cleaned up, they brought in an editor who would help with the
[Guest]: with the documents, cleaning up and so on. And then, you know, we released it in November,
[Guest]: I think they released in November of last year. It took a while to get this into shape. However,
[Guest]: the I had to spend more time editing it. And I don't edit my articles that much. When I write
[Guest]: them, they stay written for the most part, even with the spelling mistakes, I don't really go
[Guest]: back and read unless there's a factual error somewhere. So it took me a lot of effort. I hate
[Guest]: listening to my own voice. So I don't listen to my own podcasts. And I hate reading my own
[Guest]: articles, because somehow I find it very difficult for me to read at the same time, just when I've
[Guest]: written it. I read it about, you know, one year later, then I'm fine. I say, Oh, okay, this is a
[Guest]: great, this is an interesting thought process that I had at that time, and so on. So this part,
[Guest]: this time was different, you had to write and read it again, as if you're reading it afresh.
[Guest]: And you've actually been an inspiration in that because you wrote a book like way back, right. So
[Guest]: I saw that and I said, Okay, I don't think I'm cut out for fiction. Maybe I am, but it's not
[Guest]: what I am doing right now. So it's I'm more keen to write books on finance. I also think you have
[Guest]: many books left in you, looking at just that. So just your poker experience, and I know the
[Guest]: discipline and you know, so a large part of this also came in from the fact that we know a lot of
[Guest]: people who've written books, it isn't very different from how they write in some of the,
[Guest]: you know, email groups that we're on or something like that. But the point is to put a lot of what's
[Guest]: in your head into a structured way into into the writing. And we know Naren, for instance,
[Guest]: who I think if you just collect all the stuff he's sent over the years on WhatsApp and a bunch
[Guest]: of things, could be a fantastic book called Naren is typing, which is what happens when he's typing
[Guest]: on WhatsApp. I mean, so writing a book, I think is not so much about the writing, it's just about
[Guest]: the rigor and the discipline. So my inspiration has been, of course, you know, number of writers
[Guest]: and it isn't the charm of having written a book to the name that it's a nice feeling. And it's not
[Guest]: the economics because the economics never works out for a book writer, in the sense that there
[Guest]: are very few people who have become rich writing books, very, very few. And if you start off saying
[Guest]: I'll become rich using books, you should write a cookbook and try to compete with Tarla Dalal,
[Guest]: because that's pretty much as transactional as the value gets from a book or write something
[Guest]: religious that becomes really famous, but don't write like these. I mean, writing about investing
[Guest]: is great, but with the objective of making money is a very bad idea. I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and two recent web series got this spectacularly wrong, where in Gehraiya, you have this one
[Amit Varma]: character telling his girlfriend that just wait till my book is published, everything will change.
[Amit Varma]: And in this series called bestseller, this woman goes to this guy and says, you have got an advance
[Amit Varma]: of 10 million rupees. And I am like, let's do a little bit of basic research. And it would have
[Amit Varma]: been nice. But anyway, and Naren Shannoy, you're referring to, of course, I did, you know, my 250th
[Amit Varma]: episode with him. And we had even started a Facebook group called we want Naren Shannoy to
[Amit Varma]: write a book. And, and yeah, and the last hour of that four hour episode I did with him was just him
[Amit Varma]: telling stories, one after the other. And it was, it was quite beautiful. So, you know, in another
[Amit Varma]: part of your biography involves you for a very brief time teaching, where you would teach Java,
[Amit Varma]: I think for 800 rupees a week or something like that, right? And here you are sort of writing and
[Amit Varma]: rewriting your book. Now, both of these are really good ways also of sharpening your thinking and
[Amit Varma]: learning. Like when you have to teach something, you have to answer the really the basic questions
[Amit Varma]: and you got to know the subject really well. Similarly, when you're writing about something,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you can write a blog post or an article and put it out there. But if you're writing a book
[Amit Varma]: and you're editing it, you got to, you know, make sure everything is in its place. And that also
[Amit Varma]: forces you to kind of examine your thoughts and all of that. So well, as you know, the subject,
[Amit Varma]: do you feel that your thinking was, you know, clarified further by the act of teaching it or
[Guest]: writing about it, which are similarly deepening? Yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean, anything. I think I keep
[Guest]: having this conversation even with people with all my colleagues at Capital Mind itself is
[Guest]: when you have an idea, write about it. Because if you start writing about it, you start getting
[Guest]: conceptual clarity. And if you don't get the conceptual clarity, there's something wrong
[Guest]: enough wrong into the idea because it may be as simple as saying, I think there's an opportunity
[Guest]: here because and then that because the way you answer that because shows me how much conviction
[Guest]: you have in the idea, and will show you how much conviction you had in the idea. But also,
[Guest]: about whether you know all the specific aspects around it. So for one, for one, for instance,
[Guest]: our problem in this field is that there are way too many, way too many things that can happen.
[Guest]: Like today, for instance, who would have guessed that today was the day where Russia walks into
[Guest]: Ukraine? Your the stock market is down x percent and all that stuff worldwide. Does this really
[Guest]: matter to you as a long term investor and whether it's a temporary blip or a permanent one is not
[Guest]: something we can answer and you know, or do anything about. When you're trying to write
[Guest]: about something like this, if you've never experienced this before, you will not be able
[Guest]: to write about it. If you experience this only once, you'll take the wrong conclusions out of it.
[Guest]: If you experience it one too many times, you'll end up being quite cynical about the whole world.
[Guest]: And you'll probably end up writing the wrong thing. So to get perspective, you have to
[Guest]: basically start thinking from the in the shoes of a person who's never seen this before,
[Guest]: who's seen this once before, and who's seen this all the many different times,
[Guest]: and try to address each of their fears and concerns in a different way. This can only come
[Guest]: from learning. So for instance, when I first started to write about stuff in, I would analyze
[Guest]: history. And in history, the problem in history is you get very dry accounts. Stock prices,
[Guest]: for instance, they don't tell you anything, something is dropped to 20%. But if you read
[Guest]: a book about that day, it will tell you the emotions of the people that were involved,
[Guest]: where how on what happened during that day. So there was a day in October 1987, when the US
[Guest]: stock market fell 22%, which is a ridiculously high amount, high amount for the stock to fall.
[Guest]: Imagine one fifth of your wealth is gone in like a five hour trading day. How would you feel? Now,
[Guest]: it, this is like, you know, Eddie Izzard says, Pol Pot killed 1.5 million people. And we can't
[Guest]: get our heads around that number. And we're like, how do you do it? I mean, your, your,
[Guest]: your schedule must look like wake up in the morning, have breakfast, death, death, death.
[Guest]: So he said this, and he was right, because we can't get our heads around these kind of numbers
[Guest]: in any meaningful way. 22% in a day when your average movement is 0.5, and 1%, and one and a
[Guest]: half percent a day, you so you have no idea what it feels like. So you have to go through those
[Guest]: accounts. And then you have to write about it in a format that doesn't make you look like you're
[Guest]: giving a sermon, because most likely you're wrong if you're trying to give a sermon. And therefore,
[Guest]: you shouldn't go around saying that this is exactly the right way to go. Secondly, you should
[Guest]: also appear or at least have the knowledge enough to be able to tell people exactly what you're
[Guest]: thinking about. So for instance, if the markets were to go down, and you're writing a book about
[Guest]: what you should do, my always my answer to this is don't react in panic, don't buy in a panic,
[Guest]: don't sell in a panic, because both have downsides. Now, why is buying in a panic bad,
[Guest]: because the market has fallen x percent, you must be feeling like it's better. But there are,
[Guest]: you know, a stock that falls 90% is just a stock that first falls 80%. You buy it, and then it
[Guest]: falls by half. So you have no idea where the, you know, how deep the knife will gash in. So don't
[Guest]: try to cash catch a falling knife. This is, unfortunately, an element of experience. But
[Guest]: it's also an element of how you can bring this imagery across to the reader without boring the
[Guest]: daylight sort of horror. So, you know, that I think is where you have to write to get clarity
[Guest]: for yourself. Most of the time, I erase maybe 20 to 25% of what I write saying this is not making
[Guest]: sense. But without that erasing, I would not be able to write, which means I've gone down a rabbit
[Guest]: hole. And I'm saying no, no, this whole thing is wrong. I want to come back a little bit,
[Guest]: back it up and then start writing again. That is clarity. So unless you get that conceptual
[Guest]: clarity or not, but there's some topics where you have conceptual clarity, because you just
[Guest]: know. And then there you can be more, you know, the amount it helps you is relatively lesser
[Guest]: compared to the amount it might have helped you in a subject where you have a lot of experience,
[Guest]: but you're trying to string these thoughts together. The process of writing sometimes
[Guest]: tells you more about what you don't know than about what you know. And hopefully,
[Guest]: and I've seen this in a few authors very prominently, but hopefully it builds humility
[Guest]: inside of you. That says, listen, I'm giving all this Gyan, but I don't think I'm the expert at
[Guest]: this. And perhaps it's just me. But I think the one thing that, you know, in the finance world,
[Guest]: the only thing that really works in the long term is that if you're humble enough to accept
[Guest]: that you don't know what you don't know, or that you know that you don't know a lot of stuff.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, one of my favorite books of the last decade is Super Forecasting by Philip
[Amit Varma]: Tetlock, where he kind of talks a lot about this. And what you sort of realize there is that most
[Amit Varma]: people who pretend to be, most people who claim to be experts or who are known as experts, they
[Amit Varma]: are known that way, because they'll be public intellectuals, they'll come on television,
[Amit Varma]: they'll come wherever, and they are incentivized to exude certainty. And they will be wrong a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the time. And it doesn't matter once you're, you know, classified as an expert, that's who you
[Amit Varma]: are. But they're incentivized to exude certainty, and they often get a lot wrong. And what Tetlock
[Amit Varma]: found is that most of the time you pit experts against the kind of forecasters he calls super
[Amit Varma]: forecasters who get much more right, the experts do really badly, sometimes even worse than average,
[Amit Varma]: because they're holding on to their certainties. And the classic quality of these so called super
[Amit Varma]: forecasters is that humility, that they are open, and they're not hedgehogs, but foxes,
[Amit Varma]: in Isaiah Berlin's, you know, terminology, where they're not wedded to one theme or one big idea,
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. They are constantly updating their priors, thinking probabilistically,
[Amit Varma]: all of that. You know, one thing that strikes me, and when I think about it, the reason that
[Amit Varma]: I just don't think about finances, I just don't, right, I've always avoided it like a reflex
[Amit Varma]: action, you know, do something else immediately, when the thought comes to mind, is that human
[Amit Varma]: beings are hardwired to not understand big numbers. We evolved in small tribes, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, everything is small numbers, right? I think there's something called Dunbar's law,
[Amit Varma]: which means that, which basically says that you can't remember the names of more than 150 people,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that those are the people you relate to as actual people, because that's
[Amit Varma]: the kind of tribe size when we evolved. And if you go beyond that, it becomes an abstraction.
[Amit Varma]: So I can, you know, if there are 10 oranges, I can comprehend those 10 oranges. But if you tell me
[Amit Varma]: 1.5 billion or 1.2 trillion, I don't actually know the difference between them. I mean, of course,
[Amit Varma]: I do in terms of zeros, and I've been educated, but there's no way to get my mind around it.
[Amit Varma]: So this is one hardwiring that wherever big numbers come in, I, you know, we rebel against it.
[Amit Varma]: And the other way is that we are also perhaps hardwired to ignore mortality, because how do
[Amit Varma]: we live if we think about mortality, or if we accept the fact that life is meaningless,
[Amit Varma]: and we're going to die, right? So, and we get past it in various different ways, various false
[Amit Varma]: constellations, like religion, and so on. But this also means that we live with this sort of
[Amit Varma]: effective illusion of immortality, where we assume that if things are going well today,
[Amit Varma]: they will go well tomorrow, we don't need to plan, it's okay. And of course, we know that is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like one thing that's stuck a chord with me was, at the start of your book, you write
[Amit Varma]: about how when your father died, the papers were all over the place and all that. Now,
[Amit Varma]: my father died last year, and he left just no account of where anything was. So we could figure
[Amit Varma]: out one bank account of his, where the total money was less than a year of pension. So clearly,
[Amit Varma]: that's not the only thing we can't figure out anything else, you know, and it's just a complete
[Amit Varma]: mess. And in his own lifetime, obviously, I can imagine why he would not think about it. And you
[Amit Varma]: believe that, you know, all of that. So question, therefore, from two angles, one is that in your
[Amit Varma]: own life, how did you come to sort of take an interest in this and be able to understand big
[Amit Varma]: numbers, because I don't believe that this truly comes naturally to anything you have to anyone,
[Amit Varma]: you kind of have to train yourself to go against your wiring and sort of get to a way of understanding
[Amit Varma]: big numbers. And the second one is this bizarre, and we also, I guess, hardwired to be delusional
[Amit Varma]: in different ways, this bizarre tendency of people who do not understand the stock market in any way
[Amit Varma]: whatsoever, thinking that they know the formula and putting their money, like the reason I haven't
[Amit Varma]: invested so far, though I will invest with you now. But the reason I haven't invested so far
[Amit Varma]: is that I realized that I don't really understand the markets in the kind of way that would justify
[Amit Varma]: my putting my money on it. It doesn't make sense. And yet so many people get overconfident. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you you have a chapter in your book called suckered, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: and most people are self suckered. So two questions, one, the personal element into,
[Guest]: you know, how and yeah, so let me get to this the first part first, how do I handle high?
[Guest]: So actually, it's a problem, because the first time you deal with large numbers, you kind of
[Guest]: think of this as Oh, my God, this number is too big or this large. And the issue with that is that
[Guest]: quickly passes, because eventually, it's just a number at some level. But you see, there are some
[Guest]: numbers which are hardwired in our own head, for instance, the time I used to buy a stock,
[Guest]: it will always be 10,000 rupees of that stock, I would never buy more than 10,000 rupees. And now,
[Guest]: that was the same 15 years ago. And if you ask me to buy something today, my instant reflex is to
[Guest]: buy 10,000 rupees worth of stock. Of course, now I don't trade anymore. But this is nonsense,
[Guest]: because it should always be a percentage of your network. And you have to start thinking
[Guest]: of those larger numbers. And in the first place, the problem that I was having was that at some
[Guest]: point, it's just mathematics, because it just applies to larger numbers. But I was trying to
[Guest]: deal with the behavioral aspect of saying, if I have 25 lakh rupees in something, and if I lose
[Guest]: only 2%, that's 50,000 rupees, and then I was equating that 50,000 rupees into what I could
[Guest]: could buy for me. 50,000 rupees is, you know, five cell phones that nowadays come by or two,
[Guest]: you know, 50 inch TVs, I don't know, it could be any of these arguments. And then you were trying
[Guest]: to think of things in absolutes, which is a horrible way to think because that means if I
[Guest]: did the same thing with a 5 lakh rupee portfolio, I would be comfortable losing one cell phone worth,
[Guest]: but not five cell phone worths. Is that is that how I'm thinking about this? But I mean,
[Guest]: at some point in time, I realized that I have to make that switch between small and big. It took
[Guest]: some time. But what helped really was the study of macroeconomics. When you start studying
[Guest]: macroeconomics and RBI and inflation and all that stuff, all these numbers are so big,
[Guest]: you can't imagine them. Like, I mean, I can imagine, for instance, owning at some level,
[Guest]: up to say 20 crore rupees. Beyond 20 crores, I don't even know what I mean, I know, of course,
[Guest]: I will not refuse that kind of money if it comes to me. But beyond that, having that much more of
[Guest]: personal wealth is possibly going to be just, you know, an extra, it's useful, because money is a
[Guest]: motivator, it drives you and all that stuff. But I know inherently that beyond that number, it's
[Guest]: not it's not going to meaningfully change my life from what it will up till that first 20 crores.
[Guest]: When you get to 100, you're like, okay, now you're talking 5000 crores, suddenly, let's say,
[Guest]: and I'm like, okay, I have no idea what to do with 5000. I don't even know where to begin to say
[Guest]: what, as in, those numbers start sounding big. 5000 was probably the lowest number you will
[Guest]: start looking at when you're looking at macroeconomics. So foreign investors told $2
[Guest]: billion today or $1 billion today, that's 1 billion is 7500 crores, it's a big number,
[Guest]: it's a large, larger than what you can ever, so you stop thinking absolutes, because you're saying
[Guest]: $1 billion is less than their worst day, which is $5 billion, let us say. So it's not that bad a
[Guest]: deal. So but it's still bad. When RBI talks about certain numbers, like money supply, it's 800,000
[Guest]: crores. This is such a big number that I mean, I don't even know what to say in terms of absolutes
[Guest]: when I how many cars can it buy, it will be like x number. But in terms of India's total economy,
[Guest]: it is roughly 4% of all the value produced in India in the year, which technically means that
[Guest]: it's not a very big number for India as a whole. So having that much money is a big number compared
[Guest]: to its own past, but it's not a massive number compared to what India's entire GDP or is what
[Guest]: they call this. That's where I think I got into this concept of saying numbers are just numbers
[Guest]: and you know, eventually, but you have to look at numbers with certain comparisons. So what I
[Guest]: call a big number for India is small for the US. India in total trades about 60,000 crores or
[Guest]: 70,000 crores per day, which is about $10 billion. That is equivalent to what one stock in the US
[Guest]: trades per day. So relative terms, we are tiny, even though this number of 70,000 crores is so
[Guest]: large that I can't even imagine what that 70,000 crores would look like. I just know that from a
[Guest]: comparative perspective, it's not a very huge number compared to the US. So there's a reason
[Guest]: you have to start thinking this way is that when especially what we're doing right now is managing
[Guest]: money. So we manage roughly between 650 and 700 crores. This number can scare the daylights out
[Guest]: of you if you start thinking absolutes. But as you start getting relatives in place, my job is
[Guest]: primarily to ensure that this money can grow over a period of time. So whether I was growing 6
[Guest]: crores or 650 crores should not be any different, except my motivations to do both are slightly
[Guest]: different. In 6 crores, you can buy a lot of really tiny companies. In 670, you can't because
[Guest]: the tiny companies will be volatile and you won't be able to exit your portfolio position
[Guest]: quite as easily and so on. So apart from that, the size number itself shouldn't scare the daylights
[Guest]: out of you. Perhaps this is a function of experience. But it's also a function of exposure.
[Guest]: I was just lucky enough to be exposed to these numbers within my job, though I set up the
[Guest]: company and did this whole thing in terms of you know, setting up and getting you know,
[Guest]: things involved. But if it scares you, you will fall victim to the fear of large numbers.
[Guest]: And in your own case, so for instance, if you were to say, if I were to tell you,
[Guest]: Amit, you're going to need about at least 10 crores to be able to build a lifestyle for yourself
[Guest]: to retirement. That fear, 10 crores, what is Deepak talking about is, is a little bit associated by
[Guest]: if you're 30 years old, to build a 10 crore rupee portfolio will just take 20 years of investing
[Guest]: maybe 25,000 rupees a month. And then you're like, why didn't you say that? Because I'm thinking 10
[Guest]: crores is impossible, but 25,000 rupees a month is possible. It's just the way you frame the
[Guest]: argument, you know. So instead of telling a person that all your relatives will die before you,
[Guest]: you tell him that he will outlive all his relatives. It's just a different way to state
[Guest]: the same thing, just more acceptable. So the law of large numbers is just that make it sound not
[Amit Varma]: as large as it was. That's a remarkable analogy, all your relatives will die before you. And
[Amit Varma]: that no, and I completely get where you're coming from. Because in poker also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: any good player, you could be playing low stakes, like 50 100, where you're sitting with maybe 20k
[Amit Varma]: on the table, or you could be playing 500,000, where you're sitting with two lakhs on the table.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, once you're sitting there, you're just thinking of the odds, you're thinking
[Amit Varma]: of big blinds, you're thinking of the odds in a particular hand, you're thinking of equities,
[Amit Varma]: you're not thinking of them as absolute numbers, because that makes absolutely no sense.
[Amit Varma]: But one area where I wish that where I think more poker players should think of absolute numbers is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we'd have these long sessions play 1516 hours, and, you know, winnings would go up to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a couple of lakhs up or down in a session. And sometimes we'd have to go for
[Amit Varma]: breakfast and we'd all just droop to the Marriott. And the logic was, and it became very regular
[Amit Varma]: after a point. And the logic was that what is breakfast at the Marriott? It's like a couple
[Amit Varma]: of big blinds. It's like you posted a straddle and somebody raised and you folded, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so when you look at it from that perspective, everything seemed trivial. And one mistake I see
[Amit Varma]: many poker players still making, I mean, I retired in 2015. But one mistake I see many people making
[Amit Varma]: is living that kind of lifestyle where you are not giving the taking the absolute seriously enough,
[Amit Varma]: right? And you're taking that poker mindset to everything else, which doesn't always work.
[Amit Varma]: And this one similarity, in fact, between writing well and investing well, and I want to make it
[Amit Varma]: here. Like when I speak to my writing students, you know, and I'll tell them about like, one of
[Amit Varma]: the points that I drive home is that what is a piece of writing? A piece of writing is a series
[Amit Varma]: of choices that you have made. You know, how long are your sentences? What words are you using?
[Amit Varma]: Where are the parabrakes? What is the rhythm? Every piece of writing is a series of choices
[Amit Varma]: you have made. Those choices individually and together affect the reader in a certain way,
[Amit Varma]: and you want to affect the reader. Now the point is, you could say that I don't care,
[Amit Varma]: I'll just let it flow. I won't be too mindful, I don't want to work too hard.
[Amit Varma]: But that doesn't change the fact that those choices are there. You know, just as when I
[Amit Varma]: talk about making sure that a piece sounds well, that there is there is a coherent rhythm to it,
[Amit Varma]: you could choose to ignore that and say, I don't want to think about that. But then the point is,
[Amit Varma]: there is still a rhythm that is there by default, except it's a random one that you haven't put.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you might be a person who says that I don't invest. But the point is that if you have
[Amit Varma]: money, you have already invested. If it is in your savings account, you've invested in that,
[Amit Varma]: right? And you feel like you've done nothing and the money is coming to your bank.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, it is a choice that you have made by default. In a sense,
[Amit Varma]: not doing something is doing something and doing something bad in this case. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: just as a writer owes it to herself to write the most effective piece she can without compromising
[Amit Varma]: on her content. Similarly, all of us with money owe it to ourselves to sort of try and figure out
[Amit Varma]: the basics of investing because it is after all our money. You know, if you're just putting it
[Amit Varma]: in a savings account, or you're not investing it optimally, what are you doing? You're burning your
[Amit Varma]: money. That's effectively what you're doing. You're just completely burning it. Is this a
[Amit Varma]: difficult point to get across to people? Because I know, like on the one hand, there is that thing
[Amit Varma]: of don't invest if you don't know the markets well enough, because people get suckered by
[Amit Varma]: themselves. On the other hand, there is also this drive that my money is basically bleeding away,
[Amit Varma]: I need to do something about it. And then that comes with the added question of where is my
[Amit Varma]: bandwidth? I'm earning a living doing whatever I'm doing. Where is my additional bandwidth to
[Amit Varma]: then think about this? So you know, when you have conversations with people and indeed during your
[Amit Varma]: own journey, maybe speaking to your own family, your own sort of beginnings as an investor,
[Guest]: you know, just take me through your thoughts. Oh, yeah, this is so this, this has so many facets
[Guest]: to it. I'll give you one thing that I told someone who was doing running a startup in this space
[Guest]: about 10 years ago. They were running a startup around investing in mutual funds. And my statement
[Guest]: to them was when you get a 10 to 20% increment every year from your job, and that is a time when
[Guest]: there was 9% inflation, so 10 to 20% was a given. When you have that much coming in from your job
[Guest]: itself, why does investing matter to this person? Because if I am making 10% more by just working
[Guest]: harder at my job or not even working, just having a pulse, then should investing matter at all
[Guest]: because making the market will give you 10 to 12% or 15% a year, they will not excite you at the
[Guest]: absolute number will not excite you unless your corpus is really big. You're starting out investing
[Guest]: your chances are you look at a 50,000 number that's been invested as okay, give me 10%. What's
[Guest]: the number? It's 55,000 rupees, it's just 5000 rupees more. And instead, I have now earned maybe
[Guest]: 20,000 rupees more a month from my primary job, those absolute numbers, you know, that's where
[Guest]: the problem comes. And a lot of people don't invest because they don't see this, they think
[Guest]: of it as a useless waste of time. And the aspect that you have to worry about here is that investing
[Guest]: is purely behavior. That means a lot of money is made on behavior, and less is made on the skill
[Guest]: of identifying great investments, which means like you said, it's our job to find the greatest
[Guest]: investment or the find a way to, but I think our job is actually not to find the best investment,
[Guest]: our job is primarily to find a way that ensures that the stuff that I should plan for is being
[Guest]: planned for. So when I say that, I mean, for instance, I tell everybody you need a six month
[Guest]: emergency fund, you need a life insurance if you have dependents. So to give you an example,
[Guest]: if you don't have any dependents, nobody depends on you for income, you don't need life insurance.
[Guest]: Anytime you have any amount of money you're paying for life insurance is a waste of money.
[Guest]: But if you do have dependents, at least have insurance for the time that they're dependent
[Guest]: on you. So if my children are, let's say, my youngest is 10 years old. So I probably need
[Guest]: another eight to 10 years of insurance to ensure that if something happens to me today, that he can
[Guest]: be taken care of. So there is that that one has to kind of, you know, so you say that a spouse has
[Guest]: to be taken care of, or anybody else that has is dependent on you. That is when you need life
[Guest]: insurance. But when you do need it, take care of it first. So you do the hygiene part, six months
[Guest]: of an emergency buffer, life insurance, health insurance, that we owe it to ourselves. The next
[Guest]: thing you do to ourselves, there'll be a some point in our life, and maybe the creator economy
[Guest]: ensures there will never be that point in our lives, where we will stop working and stop making
[Guest]: money. This point of stop working and stop making money may be voluntary, saying I don't want to
[Guest]: work anymore for money, I'm going to do charity based work. My savings should take care of my
[Guest]: expenses. This is called retirement. And whether it happens when you're 60, or it happens when you're
[Guest]: 35 is left to how much corpus you have, how much you spend per month. To understand how much money
[Guest]: you're going to need is our job. So we're going to need to know that in order to if people got
[Guest]: this in place, then whether they put their money into an FD, or whether they put it into the most
[Guest]: complicated, complicated, you know, complex product, structured product that invest half
[Guest]: in India, half in the US, it is not relevant, because you know exactly where you need to be,
[Guest]: and you've chosen a path to get there. You could tell me, Deepak, listen, I don't get the stock
[Guest]: market business. Okay, my FDs give me 5% a year. After tax, I make 3.5%. How much time is it going
[Guest]: to how much money do I am I going to need to put per month to get to my investing goal, which is
[Guest]: let's say 15 years from now, which is a retirement corpus of X crores. And in I can tell you this,
[Guest]: that I might tell you like, take the risky road, and you can put 75,000 rupees a month,
[Guest]: take the non risky road, and you can put 125,000 rupees a month, both of which will get you there.
[Guest]: You can look at me and say, Deepak, I don't want the risky road, I'll find a way to make that extra
[Guest]: 50,000 rupees a month to be able to pay for the non risky road. Fine, it's great. It doesn't need
[Guest]: to be optimal. It doesn't need to be that you get the most maximum optimal return possible.
[Guest]: More important is the fact that you're comfortable with whatever risk and elements again, remember
[Guest]: in the market, no, this is the problem is that when the when you make 10 rupees, if I told you
[Guest]: that, you know, you are as happy as having eaten one lollipop, the losing of 10 rupees is the
[Guest]: feeling of having lost to a drop to lollipops before you could eat them. So the amount you
[Guest]: unhappiness of you face when you lose money is far more than the amount of because inherently,
[Guest]: when markets go up, we think it's our right, that, you know, we're entitled to this
[Guest]: 5%, 10%. We normalize it. Yes, it's like, you know what, I'm smart, I did, you know,
[Guest]: engineering in X college, and therefore, I deserve this money. But when it goes down,
[Guest]: we're like, oh, shit, I deserve more, but I got far lesser. So I'm actually going to be
[Guest]: more miserable than I am and it went up. So this misery causes is a is a cause of concern,
[Guest]: because every piece of misery you add to your life is just one more heart attack waiting to happen
[Guest]: 25-30 years down the line. So you want to optimize for lack of misery, not for maximum returns.
[Guest]: This is an aspect that not many people understand in the beginning. And some people will never
[Guest]: understand. So they will, for instance, they will go into the stock market and say we want the
[Guest]: maximum return, they will lose money, they will get out and say I will never invest in stocks
[Guest]: again, and then buy real estate. And it doesn't matter that the real estate gives them less
[Guest]: returns than a fixed deposit. They will just say I can't deal with the stock market was never my
[Guest]: thing. And I'm happier doing whatever I'm doing. Rather than going down the route of saying,
[Guest]: listen, I, I just was miserable taking this kind of risk in the market. I'm just going to put
[Guest]: lesser money into the stock market, more money into something that is fixed income. And therefore
[Guest]: my combined misery on the both, if I look at them together, is a lot more easy for me to handle.
[Guest]: And I wish I could answer that other and also the other part of the first question that you asked,
[Guest]: which is why do so many people feel that they can make out like bandits in the stock market?
[Guest]: I think it's the same reason why everybody feels they can win against a casino. And though the
[Guest]: stock market is not a casino, it's not a zero sum game. And I think I've mentioned this on your on
[Guest]: our earlier podcast, but I'll repeat that. So the reason the stock market is not a zero sum game is
[Guest]: if there's a stock stock that makes 10 rupees of profits, and you buy it at 100, you're paying 10
[Guest]: times earnings, you sell it to me at 150, you've made some money, the company has now made 15
[Guest]: rupees of profits. I'm also paying 10 times earnings, you also paid 10 times earnings when
[Guest]: you started now you've made 150, your 100 has become 150, you've made 50 rupees, I have bought
[Guest]: it at 150, it grows its earnings to 200, I sell it to somebody else at 200, who has lost? Nobody
[Guest]: has. The stock market is not a zero sum game. Therefore, it's better than gambling or better
[Guest]: than casino, which is another feeling why people feel that they can go in and say, listen, if I
[Guest]: bought the right companies, I would make money. Now add this to the casino ish concept of the
[Guest]: markets trades every day, you get a price every day, you get a report card every day, when you
[Guest]: get a report card every day, some days you won and some days you lost. The guys who win every day
[Guest]: show off on Twitter, saying I won, the guys who lose, talk about politics and other stuff. So,
[Guest]: you get a bunch of different sorts of people, but you're getting the information of people winning,
[Guest]: which is exactly the way the casinos highlight, they want to highlight the winners all the time
[Guest]: and the losers are like, huh, the same, the same behavior that triggers those dopamine effects,
[Guest]: affects a person who is walking into the market for the first time. So, they feel that they can,
[Guest]: and in all honesty, anybody can become rich in the stock market. It's like that ratatouille
[Guest]: statement of anyone can cook. It does not take a special kind of skill that can be learned,
[Guest]: or a special kind of inheritance that can be genetically modified in order to make great
[Guest]: money from the stock market. A lot of the stock market is just behavior. It's about greed and
[Guest]: fear. It's about panic and sustenance. And it's more important about the analogy of writing that
[Guest]: you just said. The statement that you made in the beginning was that you have to build, instill in
[Guest]: yourself a sense of rigor and discipline. 90% of the returns you'll make will come from that rigor
[Guest]: and discipline. It's only 10% will come from your brilliance in discovering which new stock was fancy.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example of why. You say you bought a stock at 100 rupees and it went to 200.
[Guest]: And you said, dude, that's a 100% return. I'm going to take it out. In all your life,
[Guest]: you're going to invest in maybe 1000 or 2000 stocks. Only about 10 or 20 will give you phenomenal
[Guest]: returns. I'm talking really phenomenal, like 100x returns. If you get out of those stocks,
[Guest]: when they give you a 1x or a 2x return, you're effectively losing the possibility that they can
[Guest]: give you a 100x or 200x return. And over time, those losers which you were anyway going to invest
[Guest]: in and lose money in, they're going to keep losing you money, but you've stopped yourself
[Guest]: from winning the big wins. The whole concept was behavioral because you thought I'll take
[Guest]: the profits when they're there. That behavior is what made you lose this money. In fact,
[Guest]: this is where it slightly differs from poker because in poker, there's literally an upper
[Guest]: limit to what you can win in a pot. There's an upper limit for the pot. There isn't such an
[Guest]: upper limit for the for the stock market. In a sense, you can stay invested for a really long
[Guest]: time without having to make a decision to get out. So this is where that discipline and rigor
[Guest]: comes into play. And I think the same discipline and rigor comes in poker, because you need to know
[Guest]: when you're out. You can't keep buying pots and losing and saying that dude, my next pot will be
[Guest]: the victory. That's a sure shot way of like, losing everything you have is the same way in
[Guest]: stock markets is where you have to know when to stop, you know, your losses. And you have to know
[Guest]: when to keep staying with your gains. And most of the time, this is a fight with your own behavior.
[Guest]: That's why the stock market investors that make the most amount of money are usually dead.
[Guest]: Because they didn't act on the various panics and manias that happened in the middle.
[Guest]: And suddenly their kin discovered that, oh, you know what my father and somebody came on TV and
[Guest]: said this, my father bought a bunch of MRF shares. I think I have like 200 of them. What can I do
[Guest]: with them? Now MRF at the time his father bought it was about maybe 500 rupees per share. So 200
[Guest]: rupees adds up to a lakh. So this guy is thinking maybe it's worth two lakhs now. MRF was at 68,000
[Guest]: rupees per share when he made the statement. So he was actually worth nearly one and a half crores.
[Guest]: So he had no idea he could have made that much. And I'm telling you, if he knew he had that many
[Guest]: shares, he would have sold it the minute that one lakh had become two lakhs. It was the sleeping
[Guest]: that earned him the money, but he did it involuntarily. Very few of us are able to do it
[Guest]: voluntarily. I hope I'm one of them, though I have proved myself wrong many times that I'm
[Guest]: not one of them in many ways. But I would say this, because anyone can make money in the stock
[Guest]: markets, everyone wants to get in on the pie when the markets are going up. And of these people who
[Guest]: get in, 80% of them lose their cool when the markets correct very naturally in a correction
[Guest]: that is brought about by factors way beyond their control, like Putin is having a bad day because
[Guest]: he woke up on the wrong side of the bed. And therefore, you've lost 10% of your money just
[Guest]: in one day. This is not acceptable to a lot of people and they walk away saying this is just a
[Guest]: scam. But it isn't. It involves discipline. How do you kind of tell them that? So therefore,
[Guest]: there will always be a bunch of new, well, I shouldn't call them bakras, but unfortunately,
[Guest]: that's the only term that kind of fits that come in. Some people stay and become sage old wolves,
[Guest]: if you may. The other just go and find less useful pastures to venture into than compared
[Guest]: to the stock market. That's all. That's how unfortunately the market is.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And there's a term for this in poker also, where, you know, typically what you should do
[Amit Varma]: is that if you're losing, cut your losses at some point. And if you're winning, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you feel you have an edge in the game, go with it, don't cash out. And the phrase is that people
[Amit Varma]: who for example, you know, somebody sat down with 50k, he takes it to 80k and he gets up.
[Amit Varma]: But if he loses a 50, he'll put in another 50, another 50, another 50, lose maybe 3 lakhs at
[Amit Varma]: the end of the day. And the phrase is eats like a bird and shits like an elephant. Right? So if you
[Amit Varma]: keep eating like a bird and shitting like an elephant, it's not good for you. And that point
[Amit Varma]: about loss aversion is also interesting. And I've seen that in poker also where, you know, losing a
[Amit Varma]: lakh on a given day will hurt way more than winning a couple. Though the interesting thing is that a
[Amit Varma]: lot of experiments in behavioral psychology are now they found are not replicable. So a lot of
[Amit Varma]: these concepts are actually suspect, I think loss aversion is one of them. But it seems to make
[Amit Varma]: intuitive sense to us, at least it certainly goes with, you know, your typical Indian conservative
[Amit Varma]: sort of approach to things. Let's kind of, you know, in your starting chapter, where you talk
[Amit Varma]: about start in the beginning, what you share a number of lessons. And I want to go through these
[Amit Varma]: lessons, because I think that they are foundational to you know, how one approaches money. And you've
[Amit Varma]: already actually, in a sense, mentioned a couple of them. But the first one is something deeply
[Amit Varma]: unintuitive, where you say let the money compound, right? And our minds don't really, you know,
[Amit Varma]: understand compound interest, you have to force yourself to understand what the hell it is,
[Amit Varma]: do the numbers again and again, and then you begin to figure out. And the interesting thing is you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about when your dad passed away 25 years ago, all his papers were in a mess, and there
[Amit Varma]: was really nothing and his investments were crap, and everything went to hell. But there was one
[Amit Varma]: aspect of it, which turned out to be incredibly profitable. And that was because of the compounding
[Amit Varma]: effect over the years. So tell me a little bit about sort of this lesson and you know, how you'd
[Guest]: like to speak about compound interest. Oh, this is actually I mean, it was fascinating to me
[Guest]: because I was doing the numbers. So when my father passed away, there was a bunch of stocks that he
[Guest]: had invested in that he had kept as a pledge to the bank for a loan that he had to take to top up
[Guest]: the housing loan that he had taken, because the house wasn't delivered on time. So there was a
[Guest]: bunch of stocks which he hadn't touched because so now the stocks have already gone up like 4x
[Guest]: from when he had bought them. And I was surprised because the other stocks my dad would have bought
[Guest]: and sold on a regular basis. So he might not have kept these shares that long. But these ones he
[Guest]: just kept and it was kept pledged. It helped him because he couldn't sell those shares because
[Guest]: they were pledged. So the bank effectively had the shares. And so he couldn't sell them. So some of
[Guest]: these stocks were, for instance, he had applied in the IPO of some of these companies in 1985 and
[Guest]: 1986. So by the time he passed away, they had already gone up four or five times. When we got
[Guest]: it, the smartest thing that happened to us was that we were dumb enough to not know how to sell
[Guest]: these shares. That we didn't even try to discover it. And my mother had, because of this, her
[Guest]: feeling was inaction is better than action, let's just keep them. This is not much in terms of
[Guest]: stocks, but there were 40 or 50 different companies, a bunch of physical shares, because they were all
[Guest]: paper shares that came in. Only seven or eight survived, to be honest. The rest of the companies
[Guest]: are zero, the rest of them for the most part. To this date, my mother cannot get over that,
[Guest]: in the sense that she feels that how can we let go of 33 companies going bankrupt?
[Guest]: You know, how could my father have not seen that these guys were in a sense,
[Guest]: he didn't know what it was like. He invested in all these companies, he had no idea what this was,
[Guest]: he just bought them. I'm like, mom, the seven companies or eight companies that survived
[Guest]: have actually gone up 40x. And not 40x of what they were, 40x of what all the 40 companies were
[Amit Varma]: worth. So the entire portfolio went up 40x because of this small percentage of companies.
[Guest]: Which gives you the Pareto principle right there. For me, it was like,
[Guest]: this is not Pareto principle, this is my dad principle. It's like, you know, for me,
[Guest]: it was not more visible, the concept of compounding, but not just the concept of
[Guest]: compounding. Now what is 40x? 40x sounds like a huge number, right? So if something doubles,
[Guest]: and then doubles again, that's 4x. And then if it does that two more times, it's 16x.
[Guest]: And if it does that one more time, it's 32x. So you're essentially doubling your money
[Guest]: in so many times. Now let's say, for whatever reason, you're able to double your money every
[Guest]: five years. Every five years, your money doubles. So in 25 years, you get 32x your money,
[Guest]: if you're able to double your money every five years. Now this sounds like, come on, Deepak,
[Guest]: doubling your money every five years is a ridiculously difficult thing to do. Agreed.
[Guest]: But was it difficult at the time that I came through? India was running at about 7 to 8%
[Guest]: inflation for the longest part. We were having 6 to 7% economic growth. So we're getting 15%
[Guest]: growth, inflation plus real growth is your nominal growth. 15% growth in the economy was
[Guest]: happening on a year-on-year basis almost every year, consistently over a period of time. So what
[Guest]: I was getting was 15% a year. If you get 14 to 15% a year, your money doubles every five years.
[Guest]: In fact, the number is about 14%, closer to 14%. So if you got the returns of the economy itself,
[Guest]: you are able to double your money every five years, which means you would get 32x returns
[Guest]: if you just had a pulse and stayed alive. You know, and as long as you didn't do something
[Guest]: really stupid. So this 40x does not sound so incredibly huge in comparison, now that I put
[Guest]: it in context. There's something more to it as well. So the important thing was to not sell
[Guest]: and to not take it out and put it into a fixed deposit. And we did do that after a while because
[Guest]: there was too much equity in comparison with everything else. But despite that, the portfolio
[Guest]: went up quite considerably. Now the issue really was that we didn't give in to those behavioral
[Guest]: emotions that resulted in this. The compounding could be achieved. That means you could allow
[Guest]: something that becomes 2x to become 4x, 4x to become 8x. Sometimes it's not visible why this
[Guest]: happens. So for instance, you might always look at me and say, Deepak, you bought this stock at
[Guest]: 300 rupees. It's at 3000 now. If I buy it now, I've lost everything. I mean, all the gains have
[Guest]: gone. But what are the chances that the 3000 becomes 30,000? It can become 30,000. And of
[Guest]: course, it may not be 30,000, the stock may split and then but you may actually get 10x your returns
[Guest]: even in a stock that has gone up a lot. And that is why our behavioral challenges for compounding
[Guest]: come in. Compounding is very difficult to fathom because of this, you know, how many years it takes
[Guest]: to double. Let me tell you going forward, the last past was the past. Now you can say that India is
[Guest]: going to grow at 6% a year, we may have 5% inflation because so the economy gives us only 11%.
[Guest]: So if you got 11% returns on your investments, what would the same thing look like? Now,
[Guest]: if you're 35 years old, you have another 25 years left for retirement. If you get 11% a year,
[Guest]: your money will double every six and a half years, let's say six years. So in a 25 year period,
[Guest]: your money will grow go up 16 times at a, if you get just the same returns of the economy. Now,
[Guest]: this is not the same thing as putting in a fixed deposit. But if you put it in a stock market,
[Guest]: over a period of 25 years, you should get roughly that much. So getting a 16x return in a 25 year
[Guest]: period is not should not be a big deal. But we don't get it. That means it literally says that
[Guest]: a small amount of money invested every month can actually result in crores of a portfolio,
[Guest]: simply because it stays invested that long. On the other side, it is the aspect of saying,
[Guest]: if you micromanage your investments too much, you might end up taking those behavioral,
[Guest]: doing those really behavioral bad things, which means you'll end up. So I would say,
[Guest]: in a poker parlance, it's like, if you're having a great streak going, going on the way up,
[Guest]: would you just walk away from it? It may be because you're playing with some really bad players.
[Guest]: And you know more than them. It may be because you're just lucky and you're getting your hands
[Guest]: in. But if you don't stick around at those times, you're probably going to only like you said,
[Guest]: eat like a bird and poop like an elephant. In the end, the metric is always about your if your
[Guest]: your if your odds are better. Warren Buffett apparently once talked to Peter Lynch and said
[Guest]: he wanted to use a quote from one of his books and Peter Lynch had written in one of his books,
[Guest]: which said, selling your winners and keeping your losers is like cutting off the flowers
[Guest]: and watering the weeds. So that I think is true for everything. So compounding will only happen
[Guest]: if you water the flowers, not, you know, try to take the flowers off. That's beautifully put. And
[Amit Varma]: no, in the poker context, I think like, first of all, I would say that a streak is something that
[Amit Varma]: you call a streak only in hindsight, right? And I think in any given moment, you evaluate the
[Amit Varma]: expected value of that decision there. So if I'm sitting with a bunch of players where I know I
[Amit Varma]: have an edge, then I'll continue playing whether I'm down or up. But if I feel I'm very tired,
[Amit Varma]: and that affects my EV, I'll factor that in. But every decision has to be according to that
[Amit Varma]: particular moment, which in a human way is hard, you could actually be down a lot because you're
[Amit Varma]: running really bad, but playing really well. And then that affects your judgment. Or you could get
[Amit Varma]: overconfident at a table where you are the fish on the table. But you know, that can affect your
[Amit Varma]: judgment. And just going back to that, you know, that hypothetical example of there's a shared has
[Amit Varma]: gone from 300 to 3000. And now this guy comes and says I missed all the this thing. And I'd again
[Amit Varma]: say that, I think the human tendency is to see that journey that a stock has made from here to
[Amit Varma]: there and say, oh, shit, I missed out on all this much. But I think at any moment in time,
[Amit Varma]: what you decide to do is a judgment call that you're making at that point in time. So if it's
[Amit Varma]: 3000, your your question is not what it was yesterday, except in the sense that if there is
[Amit Varma]: a trend happening there, and that trend could factor into your decision, but your judgment is
[Amit Varma]: is this a good buy right now or not? Right? And so, you know, and that's just a way that people
[Amit Varma]: are not hardwired to think in a similar way, if you know, a stock falls, if it's 100, and it goes
[Amit Varma]: to 80, you know, the correct decision to ask yourself is would I buy this for 80? Right?
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, otherwise, why hold it holding on to something is equal to buying it? If you wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: buy it at that price? Why would you hold on to it, then let it go either it's worth 80 or it's not
[Amit Varma]: whether you already have it or not, is irrelevant to that.
[Guest]: This I think is where I think I would disagree over here. Because again, I know there's a
[Guest]: behavioral aspect to having owned and not having owned it. But there are actually there is a
[Guest]: concept called a hold, which is don't buy, don't sell, but hold. There's a reason you want to do
[Guest]: this. Now, this is a difference between looking at an individual stock and looking at a portfolio.
[Guest]: When you look at a portfolio, which is a bunch of different things, every action that you take
[Guest]: at any given point in time introduces the need for another action to counterbalance something
[Guest]: else. If I sell something, I want to buy something and so on. That is one reason why you might want
[Guest]: to continue to hold. Second is that let us say there is a there is, I'll give you a real example
[Guest]: of some stocks that happen. There are sometimes these international funds, these international
[Guest]: funds want to exit. Now, you are looking at them exit and you're saying, listen, there are only
[Guest]: two reasons why they can exit. One is they know that something is sinister underneath.
[Guest]: And B is that they're actually exiting because maybe they need to move out of the stock and
[Guest]: some into some other stock and they're just artificially depressing the price. You don't
[Guest]: know which one is what. You have a certain position, that position is supposed to be
[Guest]: is relatively small today. You could increase the position saying, listen, I know what's right with
[Guest]: this company. I know everything's right with this company. And the minute you know that everything
[Guest]: is right, you could increase that position. We don't know yet. On the other side, on the other
[Guest]: hand, if the company is really bad, then you should be selling everything. But you don't know
[Guest]: that yet as well. You might want to wait for that further information before taking that call.
[Guest]: The only constraint is you have a portfolio, this is about 2% of that portfolio. Are you
[Guest]: comfortable with it being 2%? Or do you want to take it down to 1% and make that decision at a
[Guest]: later point in life? This is the portfolio level thinking that should drive whether you hold,
[Guest]: buy or sell a stock. And many times these are not relevant to the individual stocks,
[Guest]: gyrations or movements, but to your thinking of the portfolio as a whole.
[Guest]: The other important point of this is why you need a hold sometimes is when a stock is purchased,
[Guest]: you may be buying it over a long period of time. That means every month that you know,
[Guest]: you get more money, I will add on to it over time. That means I may want to buy the stock,
[Guest]: but not now because my money comes in the future, I'm only going to put in more money at that time,
[Guest]: at which point you're not going to sell today, but you don't have more money to buy it,
[Guest]: you would buy it if you had it. So yeah, I mean, you could make that argument that if I didn't want
[Guest]: to buy it at all, I wouldn't. In most cases, I feel that catching falling knives requires a lot
[Guest]: more experience, and a lot more knowledge. Because all companies tell you exactly what you want to
[Guest]: hear. So if you like the company, they will tell you no, the next quarter will be good. Right? So
[Guest]: the check is in the mail. It's always going to come to you like that. So if you're looking at
[Guest]: the price and it's falling, most likely the reasons why that they're giving you for the
[Guest]: underperformance is, it's likely to be, come on, are you out of your mind? Because if everybody
[Guest]: believed that the price would not be down, there's another reason that the whole market could be down
[Guest]: like you know, Russia. I mean, why does Russia attacking Ukraine affect one Indian guy selling
[Guest]: toothpaste? I mean, are we not going to brush our teeth tomorrow? Because you know, but chances are
[Guest]: that was just an excuse. And somebody had bought too much of toothpaste company and taken it to a
[Guest]: high that was too high. And now they're just correcting back to a point where it trades like
[Guest]: a toothpaste company, not like a company that mints gold. So today, you what the reason for
[Guest]: its downfall may sound like Russia's attacking Ukraine, but it's actually you're paying a
[Guest]: company that makes toothpaste as if it was making gold. Now we're going to evaluate like it's a
[Guest]: company making toothpaste, at which point your decision making would change into okay, dude,
[Guest]: I think I don't like this company making toothpaste valued at this rate. I'll wait
[Guest]: till it comes to a valuation that reflects it's making toothpaste and then only buy.
[Guest]: Great decision making requires a lot more depth of knowledge to think about it. Sometimes the
[Guest]: best thing to do is just asset allocate and hold, which means I have so much money in equity,
[Guest]: I have so much money in debt, I don't, I focus on that more than I focus on which exact company
[Guest]: have I got more ownership in. And therefore, you know, kind of but like you said, the hands
[Guest]: matter sometimes. And the more knowledgeable you are about the hands, the specific stocks,
[Guest]: you can make much more informed decisions about them. Generally, you want to have the ability to
[Guest]: identify bullshit. So in poker, I'm sure there are a lot of ways to identify whether a person
[Guest]: is bluffing most famously in the I think Casino Royale, there was this guy's eye twitching and
[Amit Varma]: those are very cinematic depictions in the real world where poker right now is that any good
[Amit Varma]: player will mix it up to the extent that it's as close to game theory optimal as possible. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like just to give you an example, let's say there is 200 rupees in the pot,
[Amit Varma]: and I bet 100 rupees and now you have a decision on the river. So you are you have to call 100 to
[Amit Varma]: win 300 because there's 300 in the pot, you're getting three to one odds, right? And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: you should call if you know, 25% you know, depending on how often I bluff, if I if I'm
[Amit Varma]: bluffing too much, you should absolutely call. But if I'm bluffing too little, you should fold.
[Amit Varma]: And the idea there is that I construct my range in such a way that when I give you three to one odds,
[Amit Varma]: 25% of my hands are bluffs and the rest are value hands. So it doesn't matter what you do.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter what you do. If you play perfectly, I break even. But if you call too
[Amit Varma]: much or fold too much, I make money in the long run, you're looking at everything in the long
[Amit Varma]: run. So it's a it's a whole different kind of game that whole Casino Royale romance that you'll see
[Amit Varma]: somebody's nose twitch and all that and you'll get a tell and you'll do all that. No, like at any
[Amit Varma]: decent level, it's like fairly mathematical and that doesn't really happen. But let's move on to
[Amit Varma]: your second lesson now, which is in fact what you nicely segwayed into yourself. And your second
[Amit Varma]: lesson there was money is made largely when you sleep. Right? And explain this a little bit because
[Amit Varma]: again, I think romantic notions of stock market investing, just as in poker, are often very far
[Amit Varma]: from the truth, where the notions are that you know, you've got your flickering screens in front
[Amit Varma]: of you, you see something happen, Russia has invaded Ukraine, like so Russia, Ukraine is
[Amit Varma]: very much the topic of the day. So you know, they look at like Russia, Ukraine,
[Amit Varma]: this has happened, there's a strike going on in the salt mine, let's sell this. You know,
[Amit Varma]: that's a romantic notion of whatever, but at the level of nitty gritties, it's not quite that
[Amit Varma]: dramatic. So, you know, so tell me a little bit by what you mean when you say money is made largely
[Guest]: when you sleep. So this actually comes down to that very point, because the attraction that
[Guest]: your skill is in identifying those opportunities when they happen. It's less relevant than just
[Guest]: having a simplistic whole story. I'll give you an example. I mean, a lot of people tell me this.
[Guest]: Deepak, I have made 200% on the stock. And I'll say, hey, I have the same stock, I made only 10%.
[Guest]: And then I asked them, how much have you invested in the stock? I put 10,000 rupees.
[Guest]: 10,000 rupees. So I'll say I have put 5 lakh rupees, my 5 lakh rupees, I made 50,000 rupees,
[Guest]: your 10,000 you made. So it's not like you didn't have 5 lakh rupees, you just chose to put 10,000.
[Guest]: So how much money you put into the opportunity is another reason why you might make more or less
[Guest]: on this. He might have 4 lakhs 90,000 rupees sitting in a fixed deposit, which didn't give
[Guest]: him anything or give him three and a half percent post tax. So I am, I would say a large part of
[Guest]: what money you make is how you allocate money to this. The more money you allocate to opportunities,
[Guest]: and then the more your feeling of wanting to act as well. And if you start acting too often,
[Guest]: the chances are that you are going to either exit an opportunity too soon, or and not allow it give
[Guest]: time to breathe. Or in an even worse fashion, you're going to generate stress by owning that
[Guest]: investment and looking at it on an everyday basis. If you take these two aspects, and then say what
[Guest]: happens if you just hold the stocks. Now I did an experiment, I said, okay, 2006, I take all the
[Guest]: stocks of the nifty. And I put an equal amount of money in every single one of them. 10 years later,
[Guest]: what happens? So I find out that 10 years later, four stocks had fallen more than 95%.
[Guest]: That means these were nifty stocks, the top 50 stocks of the Indian exchange,
[Guest]: four of them have actually fallen 95% plus some was 98, some 96, Unitec and this.
[Guest]: Around another 14 of them had negative absolute returns, which means whatever I'd invested in
[Guest]: 2006, would actually be less in 2016 on an absolute basis. Another 14 or 15 of them roughly
[Guest]: made positive returns, but less than inflation, which was roughly 7% average during this time.
[Guest]: So you're saying 37 to 39 companies made less than inflation, and some of them lost severely
[Guest]: out of 50. And yet, the whole amount of money, which is, let us say 10,000 rupees per stock
[Guest]: into 55 lakh rupees, made an a total return of over 12% per year, not counting dividends
[Guest]: in those 10 years, which means the 10 or 11 stocks that actually made money made it paid so much
[Guest]: money that they were enough to kind of, what did I do differently? I didn't sell anything,
[Guest]: not the winners, not the losers, I just left them, let them all be, I'm saying,
[Guest]: what are the flowers and the thorns, it doesn't matter, because in the end, whatever's bad will
[Guest]: just will die, but the stuff that remains will be enough to take you for a long time. That was what
[Guest]: I meant when I say money is made when you sleep, because if your concept of action is that if I'm
[Guest]: not sleeping, I need to be finding the bad stocks and selling them. My answer to that is it doesn't
[Guest]: matter if you sell them all. And in the surreal garden of happiness, what appears to be a flower
[Amit Varma]: today could be a thorn tomorrow and vice versa. So just hold the damn thing and see where it goes.
[Guest]: Yeah, for the most part, if you've made your decisions, large and diversified,
[Guest]: I built something called a random portfolio. So I said, at any point in time, choose a bunch of
[Guest]: stocks, randomly 10, it's like monkeys picking stocks, is that monkey picking stocks better
[Guest]: than the stock market? If consistently, monkeys picking stock become better than the stock
[Guest]: market, better than the stock market, it's a bull market. If it is not possible, that means you're
[Guest]: half and half, sometimes you beat sometimes you don't, then it's not a bull market. It could be
[Guest]: a bear market, it could be a sideways market, but it's not a bull market, that means the stocks are
[Guest]: not going up. In a bull market, no matter what you do, you will make money. It is like being blind,
[Guest]: it's not your skill, it is the monkey. In a bear market, there is some skill involved, but
[Guest]: the bear market players will only make money in a bull market. That means if the market stay
[Guest]: bearish for a long time, it doesn't matter what skill you have, you will not make money.
[Guest]: You need a bull market to make money. And if you survive long enough, you will see bull markets,
[Guest]: because bull markets are a function of greed and fear, fear of missing out and the greed of making
[Guest]: money. And that is so human, that no matter what happens at some point in time in five years,
[Guest]: there will be a layer of greed that will drive the markets up. India's entire market history from
[Guest]: 1992 to now, post liberalization, can be classified into four great years, 2004 to 2008, January
[Guest]: roughly, and two great years between 2020 and 2022. That is it, that is our bull markets.
[Guest]: In the middle, there was some bull, some bear, some bull, some bear. But these are the years
[Guest]: where if you had stayed invested in the markets, and not done anything, you would have made out
[Guest]: like a bandit. You miss these six years, and it would take a lot of skill to make money.
[Amit Varma]: Do these years correlate with easy money coming in from the US, quantitative easing and so on?
[Guest]: There was no quantitative easing in 2004, 2007, but
[Amit Varma]: But you had low interest rates, you had low interest rates and all that, right?
[Guest]: Actually, the US started raising interest rates in 2005. We don't miss that. So it was,
[Guest]: it was not, the low interest rates started off in 2008. But it was easy money in the sense the
[Guest]: money was coming in from the US, they were buying anything that was possible,
[Guest]: because relatively, we were so small. 2020 also was a function of,
[Guest]: but there has been quantitative easing in the West from 2008, 2018.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it did affect us.
[Guest]: At that time, the market was growing only at 10% a year. So, which is great, which is not that great.
[Guest]: But I'm talking about the last 20 to 22, we grew more than 50% in the stock markets.
[Guest]: Well, I'm, I don't have the exact numbers, but I'm just saying 2004 to 2008 was just phenomenal.
[Guest]: I think the market doubled, went from 1300 in the nifty to 8000 in those four years,
[Guest]: or sorry, 6000, 6500, 300 in those four years. So roughly 4x in four years.
[Amit Varma]: So anybody who invested would have felt so skillful.
[Guest]: That's when I wrote this post-award guzzles, which were,
[Guest]: Kal karenge hisaab aisa ki, aaj peene de aur peene de. That's what the...
[Amit Varma]: Lovely.
[Guest]: So it is aaj peene de aur peene de, kal karenge hisaab aisa ki.
[Amit Varma]: You sing?
[Amit Varma]: No, I don't. I'm terrible as a singer.
[Amit Varma]: I would have asked you to sing it.
[Guest]: Right. Pankaj Udaas will sue your show and mine because we're cross-proceeding, but you know.
[Amit Varma]: He's already Udaas.
[Guest]: He's already Udaas. But this was, this was the point. But because,
[Guest]: and there's another Jagjit Singh guzzle that actually says it, it's
[Guest]: hosh walon ko khabar kya, dekhudi kya cheez hai. Which is, this is it, right?
[Guest]: You don't know why markets are going up like this, 4x in three years, come on.
[Guest]: Every old time I was telling you, guys, this time will not last. And yet it lasts another year.
[Guest]: It sits on your face and, you know, beats you up.
[Guest]: And you have no way to, you know, counter the bullishness or anything like that.
[Guest]: Eventually, the naysayers are right.
[Guest]: But that eventually has probably made a bunch of people so rich that
[Guest]: they walked away from the market with a fairly reasonable amount of gains,
[Guest]: if they're smart enough.
[Amit Varma]: Was it Keynes who said that the markets can stay irrational longer than you can stay solvent?
[Amit Varma]: So if you're betting on, you know, markets crashing, yeah, sure, they will. But when?
[Guest]: Yeah, Alan Greenspan, and I keep using this example, so I'm sorry if I've used this before.
[Guest]: He said in 1996, December, that the markets were irrationally exuberant.
[Guest]: Now, this is the most famous central banker of our time, the guy who's presided over the
[Guest]: largest amount of easier money policies, and therefore, the largest amount of stock market
[Guest]: excesses. He's telling you the markets exuberant in December 1996, the market proceeds to go up
[Guest]: another 50% from there, crashes 30%. At the time it crashed the lowest point of which it took two
[Guest]: and a half years to crash. And when it did, the lowest point of the crash was still above the
[Guest]: point at which he had said the markets were irrationally exuberant. So he was right, but he
[Guest]: was wrong. And this is the most celebrated central banker of all time. So I'm like, if he couldn't
[Guest]: get it, what are the chances anyone else can with the data information we have at hand, we can be,
[Guest]: you can be the so Dave Barry writes about this in his book, he talks about Florida and old people.
[Guest]: And he says, there is a there are people who put their left indicator on as soon as they get out
[Guest]: of their house, and it stays on for like forever. So he says that it's called an eventual left.
[Guest]: So at some point in life, this guy's going to take a left turn. And you just don't know when.
[Guest]: So when you drive behind such a person, you have to know that this is an eventual left kind of
[Guest]: driver. This is the point about naysayers in the market, they will eventually be right. But,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when is the question. So, you know, like this, that old saying that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so and so who predicted the last three recessions predicted a total of 15 recessions,
[Amit Varma]: right? And I guess the same could be said for stock market crashes. Your lesson number three
[Amit Varma]: is very interesting. And you demonstrate this in such detail that I have to just ask people to go
[Amit Varma]: and look at your book for the lucid explanation of this with the actual numbers where you say,
[Amit Varma]: you don't need that much money to make money, right? You can start small, let it compound,
[Amit Varma]: be disciplined, you know, let it earn value sleep and so on and so forth. And then you make a really
[Amit Varma]: interesting point about the first crore, where you say, quote, the first crore you make will
[Amit Varma]: largely come from your income from the work you do, your profession will pay you a salary or your
[Amit Varma]: business will generate the cash, or you will join a startup which is acquired and voila, you have
[Amit Varma]: some money, right? Which you know, is, again, many people won't kind of think in these terms,
[Amit Varma]: everybody wants to, you know, get rich super fast and so on. And there is this old quip about
[Amit Varma]: the easiest way to make a million dollars is to start with 10 million. So big and now you then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, go into a bunch of sort of you give these bits of advice. And the first of those
[Amit Varma]: is make money not returns. So, you know, explain this.
[Guest]: This is actually okay, let me start with the first part. How much money do you need to make
[Guest]: money is a question. And I told you about this, I said the difference between making the same
[Guest]: amount of money with a high return mechanism, and the low return mechanism may be of the order of
[Guest]: say 20 or 30,000 rupees per month. If you find it a little more comfortable to do the more risky one,
[Guest]: sorry, the less risky one, then you just have to find out 20-30,000 rupees more. Now, the first
[Guest]: crore that you make, and because you are, you know, you're going to be squeamish about investing
[Guest]: most of your money, because it's hard earned money, you've just started to earn it and all
[Guest]: that stuff. When you make your first crore, it will largely come from the income that you make,
[Guest]: because your make, I'll give you just the simplest example, let's say you're starting off your salary
[Guest]: career with about a 5 lakh per year salary. At this point, the amount you're saving is probably
[Guest]: of the order of 30-40,000 rupees a year, I'm talking 3000 rupees a month. You work really hard,
[Guest]: build yourself a YouTube course on SEO, I don't know whatever it is YouTube algorithm course,
[Guest]: you get yourself an additional 5 lakh rupees. You made a 100% return on the time that you've
[Guest]: invested from the 5 lakh to 10 lakh. This 10 lakh allows you to save from 50,000 to maybe 2 lakhs
[Guest]: per year, your savings have gone up. But you know what, most of these returns have come because
[Guest]: you've increased your income, not because your earnings from your, even if you'd invested those
[Guest]: amount you had saved 50,000, do you think that would have ever resulted in a 5 lakh rupee per
[Guest]: hour, 5 lakh rupee payout, chances are zero. Do the same thing, 10 lakhs becomes 20, 20 lakhs
[Guest]: becomes 30. Your income can keep growing by the experience you gain, the courses you do,
[Guest]: the skills you have, up to a certain point. So you start saving from there and slowly build up
[Guest]: your corpus. After a few years you're earning 25-30 lakhs, maybe 10 years later, and you've
[Guest]: got savings of about 50-60 lakhs. Most of these savings, if you look back about it,
[Guest]: it will be coming in from the increased amounts of money you've been able to put in,
[Guest]: largely because your income has increased. And when you get up to the first crore,
[Guest]: you'll find that most of the money has started to come from that, the amount you've saved.
[Guest]: It is beyond the one CR, is where your impact is more significant of the money you've saved,
[Guest]: that overshadows the incremental income that you earn from your salary. Because at some point,
[Guest]: we all stagnate in terms of salaries. Of course, in Bangalore, there's no such thing,
[Guest]: but everywhere else, I think at some point, you kind of start getting to a point where you're
[Guest]: getting the 5%, 10% increases, not the 50%, 60%. And because of that, the amount you're going to
[Guest]: gain from the investments you make will start to look much better. So that's the early point of
[Guest]: this. But if you focus your attention on growing your income in the early years, not what, where
[Guest]: you save, you will get there in a much faster fashion, get there being, you have to figure out
[Guest]: where you want to get to in the first place. But whatever that there is, you'll get there faster
[Guest]: by just focusing on making more money from what you actually do, rather than earning money from
[Guest]: your investments. That means I would say, take Amit Verma's clear writing course, it will have
[Guest]: a greater return on investment on the money that you pay Amit than any stock that you can buy for
[Guest]: that same amount. And I can guarantee you this that anything you earn from the clear and the way
[Guest]: your clear writing, the clear writing helps you is because it clarifies your thinking and your
[Guest]: thought process. And this helps you no matter what job you have, whether your job involves writing
[Guest]: or not has no relevance, you will write eventually for the pure joy of just discovering what the
[Guest]: what the hell you've just your mind has just told you. And that is a valuable skill to have. And
[Guest]: that will earn you more of a salary, more of an income more of a, and you might eventually get a
[Guest]: career as a writer as well, because you're chosen a skill which is valuable enough. Because, you
[Guest]: know, I know that there are not that many great writers in India or the world. And anyone who's
[Guest]: a great writer will eventually make, hopefully, at least this is one part of the show where I'm
[Amit Varma]: looking at you damn skeptically and saying, stay in your lane, bro. Great. No, but you know, one
[Amit Varma]: of my favorite pieces of advice in the book, and which I want to underscore, because I think that
[Amit Varma]: this is absolutely spot on isn't what you just said, where you've written in your book about
[Amit Varma]: the importance of investing in yourself, do online courses, get a degree and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like to double down and say that, you know, earlier, we spoke about time is also a scarce
[Amit Varma]: resource. How do we invest time? And I would say in terms of both money and time, when you're young,
[Amit Varma]: the best investment you can make is in yourself. And another way of thinking about it is that every
[Amit Varma]: action you make today is an investment in your future self, you're shaping your future self,
[Amit Varma]: you sit and play Candy Crush for an hour, congratulations, you just made your future
[Amit Varma]: self a little stupider, right? But you sit and read a good book for an hour, or do my clear
[Amit Varma]: writing course, or whatever, you know, listen to a Deepak Chhenoy podcast, listen to the binge on
[Amit Varma]: the Capital Mind podcast, then you that's an investment in yourself in subtle and unseen ways
[Amit Varma]: it will pay off. So that's just sort of a fantastic piece of advice. And in that chapter, you then go
[Amit Varma]: on to give such detailed advice that I, you know, I think people absolutely have to read it. One is
[Amit Varma]: what you spoke about earlier about the importance of allocation, that think about allocation and it
[Amit Varma]: need not be that one size fits all, different people have different priorities. And you allocate
[Amit Varma]: according to that, you know, if someone really loves to travel, and it means something to them,
[Amit Varma]: you allocate some money. In your book, you use the example of going for a holiday to Croatia,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know why you picked Croatia. But yeah, there you go. And, you know, think about allocation
[Amit Varma]: and you know, plan for your necessities. And, you know, with the rest, enjoy your life,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it, and build personal leverage, you have also said. So what do you mean by build
[Amit Varma]: personal leverage? And how is it different from the kind of investing in yourself that we spoke about?
[Guest]: Okay, so personal leverage is a complicated concept to understand, but think about it like this.
[Guest]: Okay, when you invest, when you do something as a job for someone, they pay you a salary,
[Guest]: and that is it. You stop working, the money stops flowing in. So it's like you're a hamster in a
[Guest]: wheel that's giving you water, you're as long as you're running, the water's coming, the minute
[Guest]: you stop, the water stops and you die of thirst. This is terrible, because the typical advice now
[Guest]: is, we're getting a lot of water today, take that water and store it somewhere and let it keep
[Guest]: growing. And eventually when you'll have you'll get tired enough and stop and the water stops,
[Guest]: you have a storage of water somewhere else that you can use for your future needs. Fantastic,
[Guest]: very great advice. But there's another way. And there's a better, this is a better way
[Guest]: according to me. This is the idea of building personal leverage. Now, it comes back to the
[Guest]: creator economy in ways that perhaps are interesting for this episode. But anything
[Guest]: that you build that is an asset helps you in the long term. Now, what that does is,
[Guest]: for instance, if you wrote a book, now, it's a very bad idea, because you won't get anything
[Guest]: in royalties nowadays. But let's say it's a wild chance, there's an optionality of it being a
[Guest]: bestseller, that optionality is one in 500. You make a YouTube channel, it can get get you some
[Guest]: income, but it'll get you that income 10 years down the line. This at some level is a flywheel
[Guest]: that can operate by itself. Well, not entirely by itself, but some part of it can operate without
[Guest]: you needing to work for it at a certain stage. Start a business, employ people to do the work
[Guest]: you do, you can reap the benefits while paying them a salary, get a house. Now, I don't recommend
[Guest]: this because in India, it's a terrible idea because the returns are not great. But or build
[Guest]: a stock portfolio, the stock portfolio pays you dividends, the dividends take care of you,
[Guest]: regardless of whatever, and they kind of grow on their own separately. I think building personal
[Guest]: leverage is a concept of saying you're not just investing in yourself to be able to get a better
[Guest]: salary. But you also want to build something that sustains itself, even if you aren't working. So
[Guest]: you stop, the more personal leverage you build, the better it is. And so this is also the way the
[Guest]: world thinks of you. So for instance, the tax department thinks of you, you have no personal
[Guest]: leverage, you're an employee, you're an employee, you get a salary, that salary, they take the tax
[Guest]: out, you get the remaining, you spend it. You own a business, you make some revenue from something,
[Guest]: you get to spend money from it, and only on what's left do you pay taxes. Even better,
[Guest]: you build a private limited company, the taxation is not 33%, but it's 25%. I've been telling you
[Guest]: about this as well, that your tax suddenly falls to 25% if all you do is take the extra effort
[Guest]: of creating a private limited company in India and doing the exact same thing.
[Guest]: The money that stays, of course, stays in your own little private limited company, but that
[Guest]: money is effectively yours to use at some point. The CAs may disagree, but by and large,
[Guest]: it's a better way to allow your money to compound than to have to earn a salary. So the tax
[Guest]: department recognizes the more personal leverage you have, the lower we should tax you. So maybe
[Guest]: listen to the tax department. So this is a form of investment, but personal leverage also has
[Guest]: different layers. If you build reputation, that's personal leverage. Because people in this world,
[Guest]: trust is a deficit, it always will be a deficit. The more trust you can generate by being who you
[Guest]: are, whether you're a creator or whether you're a speaker or someone who just, I don't know,
[Guest]: does a bunch of things that make your face as recognition in a certain field that you really
[Guest]: love to operate in. I know a bunch of people who, for instance, are super trustworthy for just
[Guest]: knowing the historical sites in Bombay or Bangalore or Delhi, because they do it as a hobby.
[Guest]: They just take people for a walk every Sunday. This is personal leverage at some level. They're
[Guest]: not realizing it right now. They're probably doing it for free because they enjoy this stuff.
[Guest]: But they're building an aspect of personal leverage that gives them the optionality that
[Guest]: tomorrow this could be a business. And when I start that business, I already have the trust
[Guest]: and the recommendation of hundreds of people who love what I have done and will recommend me for
[Guest]: getting more business or perhaps pay me directly as well. That personal leverage is something if
[Guest]: you focus on, it is way more satisfying emotionally and personally. But it's also something that will
[Guest]: build you financial leverage at a later point in time. Yeah. And I think what many people don't
[Amit Varma]: realize is that they have, like the guy who takes people for walks, for example, they have personal
[Amit Varma]: leverage in ways that they are not using or monetizing or whatever. You know, you could
[Amit Varma]: have some skills that people value, but you are not giving them a chance to pay you for it. And
[Amit Varma]: you're not giving them a chance to benefit from it. So it's like, you know, it would be a positive
[Amit Varma]: sum game if you do so. Like, you know, if this person with this deep knowledge organized tours
[Amit Varma]: and took money for it and all that, I'm sure people are interested. Or if you, for example,
[Amit Varma]: were to teach a course on, you know, how to invest, people would pay a massive premium.
[Amit Varma]: No question about it. And you see in the creator economy, people realizing it,
[Amit Varma]: like there's a great video link from the show notes by Ali Abdaal, where he talks about how
[Amit Varma]: last year he made $2.7 million in income. Right. And what I love about many of these YouTubers
[Amit Varma]: is a very transparent, they'll do a full video where they'll tell you I made so much.
[Amit Varma]: And because people love such videos, they'll make even more. But, and it is such a mix of nice
[Amit Varma]: things. So he's got passive income coming from courses and Skillshare, where he's got courses
[Amit Varma]: on YouTubing and creating and this and that productivity, and that's passive income and
[Amit Varma]: coming down to the equivalent of crores of rupees just from there. He's got a live cohort based
[Amit Varma]: YouTubing course, you know, charging a premium because it's live and you know, personal mentorship
[Amit Varma]: and all that and making tons of money from there, and so on. So he breaks it all down where the
[Amit Varma]: 2.7 million is coming. And that's and what a person like that is doing is sitting down and
[Amit Varma]: saying that, okay, what is valuable about me, you know, and these are the many things which are
[Amit Varma]: valuable about me the little silos of knowledge in which I have something and I can help people
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. These are the different ways in which I can express them. So online course, cohort based
[Amit Varma]: course, blah, blah, blah. And then you kind of do that. And I think too many of us have value
[Amit Varma]: locked up inside of us, you know, have that personal leverage already, which we don't
[Amit Varma]: do enough to monetize, you know, and we are stuck in the old paradigm,
[Amit Varma]: economy goes down, we get laid off, you know, we're like, shit, I'm worth nothing.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody's worth nothing. Right? So that's what to get back to your book.
[Guest]: No, no, but it's, you have a point. There's a reason why people don't like to build personal
[Guest]: leverage, because there's a risk involved, that if you put yourself out there, what if you fail?
[Guest]: This what if you fail, according to me, in today's world, there should be no consequences of
[Guest]: if today there is a failure, what's going to happen? Nobody going to drive us,
[Guest]: drive a stake into you and, you know, put you on this thing. But the problem is, we think like
[Guest]: that. And the cost of failure today is lesser and lesser. And what happens if your YouTube channel
[Guest]: fails? Almost nothing, there will be no graveyard and there will be no tombstone. You don't even
[Guest]: have to think of it and you just it will just vanish into the ether. Like it never existed.
[Guest]: There will be no, you know, so you Why are we then so fearful of failure? I don't understand
[Guest]: that. But I think a lot of it comes down to, you know, this is why Indians like government jobs
[Guest]: is because you can never fail in those government jobs, they can never fire you.
[Guest]: And therefore, you know, the risk taking is is non existent. And yet India is a country that
[Guest]: has more entrepreneurs than most of the Western countries. And from a numbers perspective,
[Guest]: even if you add up all the Western countries, all the small entrepreneurs in the in those countries
[Guest]: won't add up to even half of what India has. India is a very tiny part of our economy is
[Guest]: actually salaried. Most of our economy is entrepreneurial or by nature or by force by so
[Guest]: So we get risk, yet, we are afraid of taking those risks.
[Amit Varma]: I think one of the reasons that so many people apply for government jobs and that charm of the
[Amit Varma]: government jobs still remains where there'll be some lowly railway linesman position open at
[Amit Varma]: 20,000 a month, and there'll be 8 lakh people applying for it. And, you know, with PhDs and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And it's a sad and poignant reason and you can't blame them, which is that we are
[Amit Varma]: a desperately poor country. Those opportunities really aren't there. It's been 70 something years
[Amit Varma]: of economic mismanagement where bad policies have kept millions of people in poverty. Where I am
[Amit Varma]: hopeful is not that governance will change. You know, I have no hope there. Where I'm hopeful
[Amit Varma]: is that technology in interesting ways can actually empower people. Like I tell the,
[Amit Varma]: I've told the story, I think a couple of times on my show of this vlogger called MSK.
[Amit Varma]: Have I told you about it? Let me quickly go through it. There's this guy called Mohammed
[Amit Varma]: Saleem Khan, and born in a village in Bengal, I'll link to the talk where he talks about all
[Amit Varma]: of this as well. Born in a village in Bengal, comes to Mumbai, staying in a slum in Dharavi.
[Amit Varma]: And his mother is, you know, a domestic help in various houses. And his father is a watchman.
[Amit Varma]: And when he's 15, he, his mother, his siblings, they go back to the Bengal village for a holiday.
[Amit Varma]: And then they get a phone call saying that your father's gone mad, come home. So they come back
[Amit Varma]: to the slum in Dharavi. And as they're walking towards their home, things from their house are
[Amit Varma]: all outside. And inside the house, there is nothing, it's an empty house, and the father's just inside,
[Amit Varma]: and he's lost it. But anyway, they control the situation, they get him treated. And after they
[Amit Varma]: get him treated, and he's back to his senses, his mother asked his father that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: over 15 years, everything we saved, we kept it in this little trunk, you know, where is that trunk?
[Amit Varma]: And he says, Oh, I was going somewhere by auto and I didn't have change. So I gave the auto
[Amit Varma]: driver that trunk. Right? So 15 years, working like this, lost everything. And MSK, Mohan Selim
[Amit Varma]: Khan, he's a 15 year old kid. And at this point, he says he made two promises to himself. Right?
[Amit Varma]: One of them, as you would understand, is I will buy my parents a house in Bombay. Right? And the
[Amit Varma]: other one is what, because he's 15. And I'm really glad he made this one. He said, there is that
[Amit Varma]: super bike I like, I will buy myself that super bike. He does both. Okay, he goes on YouTube,
[Amit Varma]: starts shooting stuff with his phone, eventually becomes, you know, hugely popular vlogger. And
[Amit Varma]: if you see any single video of his, you won't get why he's popular. But if you see a bunch of them,
[Amit Varma]: you begin to feel that connection again, the economy, the economy of intimacy, right? And he
[Amit Varma]: does all that. And this is a terribly inspiring story to me. Because so far, in our history,
[Amit Varma]: you have to be even no matter how creative you are, you've had to have some kind of privilege
[Amit Varma]: to just get into the starting door. Right? You just have to. And today that's changing. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm not saying it's changing for everyone or a super easy, but you saw an element of that with
[Amit Varma]: tik tok. And you see an element of that with people like this. And God knows how many kids
[Amit Varma]: in how many parts of this country are watching MSK's videos, and he's a cult. So he's got,
[Amit Varma]: you know, his followers are called MSK, wherever he travels, somebody or the other will recognize
[Amit Varma]: him, come to him, show him around. Right? And he's an inspiration to so many and God knows what the
[Amit Varma]: unseen impact of that is. So that gives me hope. But that's anyway, a digression. So to get back
[Amit Varma]: to the book, your second chapter, I found really interesting, where you sort of talk in detail
[Amit Varma]: about mutual funds, different kinds of mutual funds, and how one picks a firm, all the parameters
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And at this point, I want to tell you the story of an interesting scam,
[Amit Varma]: that it's a thought experiment. So it's not in your chapter suckered, it's just a thought
[Amit Varma]: experiment. But it's a game theory thing. Let's say that you and I decide that we will write to
[Amit Varma]: 1000 people and tell them that I must have shared this with you, I wrote a post on it ages back,
[Amit Varma]: you and I will write to 1000 people and we tell them that we'll tell you the result of the next
[Amit Varma]: India Australia match or whatever the series is. And we won't charge you anything, we'll just
[Amit Varma]: tell you and you see over a period of time what our track record is. And we say India will win.
[Amit Varma]: Right now, but to 500 people, we say India will win to 500 people, we say Australia will win.
[Amit Varma]: No matter what happens, we got it right for 500 people. Rinse and repeat, we get it right two
[Amit Varma]: times in a row for 250 people, three times in a row for 125 people. And finally, once we get it
[Amit Varma]: five times in a row, the people who are left are thinking, gosh, these people are geniuses. And
[Amit Varma]: then they're paying us a subscription and we've made out like bandits and we get the hell out of
[Amit Varma]: there and, you know, go somewhere else. And I hope Ashneet Grover is not listening to this. It's an
[Amit Varma]: idea. So yeah, and this in a sense is also this is reflective of the survivorship bias. I had a
[Amit Varma]: variety of different strategies, which were India, Pakistan, India, India, India, or India, India,
[Amit Varma]: India, Pakistan, India, or I don't know where Pakistan came in and India, Australia series,
[Amit Varma]: but you get my point. And similarly, the point that you've made with mutual funds is that you
[Amit Varma]: have to watch out for the survivorship bias as well, that there'll be many, many funds with many
[Amit Varma]: different strategies doing many different things. And there is no way of knowing if someone who's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, got the best results over three years, whether they got kind of lucky or not. And the
[Amit Varma]: conclusion that I seem to get from your entire chapter is that the best kind of fund is the
[Amit Varma]: index fund, because the index fund will outperform most other funds. And I'm guessing the ones that
[Amit Varma]: doesn't outperform, you don't know whether they got lucky or not, because somebody is going to get
[Amit Varma]: lucky. So is that like a correct summation? Because in the past, I vaguely remember that you
[Amit Varma]: had some nuances, I forget in which conversation, but you had some nuances to add about this. And
[Amit Varma]: it was like, no, no, it's not all survivorship bias.
[Guest]: It's interesting that you put it that way, because it's not only survivorship bias,
[Guest]: but there's a couple of other reasons why I think index funds are doing very well or will do very
[Guest]: well. It's about, let me, let me put it another way. There are regimes. So certain regimes suit
[Guest]: certain kinds of fund managers. So they become celebrities in those fund manager times. There
[Guest]: was a guy called Peter Lynch in the US, and he ran a very successful fund called the Magellan Fund.
[Guest]: Before him, there was a guy called Jerry Tsai, who during his time was reasonably successful.
[Guest]: Peter Lynch was quite phenomenally successful. But then since then, the Magellan Fund hasn't
[Guest]: performed quite as well. Warren Buffett himself for the last 10 years or 15 years, his stock
[Guest]: hasn't performed quite as well as the S&P 500 itself. It's interesting because you see in India
[Guest]: in 2000, in the 2004 to 2008 timeframe, you could ask anybody in your in India, which mutual fund
[Guest]: should I buy? They'll tell you HDFC Mutual Fund. And there's a reason for that, because it was
[Guest]: doing the best, it had a bunch of funds, they're all doing really well, and so on. In the 2010 to
[Guest]: 2011-12-13 kind of timeframe, you would get IDFC Mutual Fund, the fund manager was a star and he
[Guest]: did really well for a long time and so on. Then from 2000, maybe 15 to 17 or 18, there's a bunch
[Guest]: of other guys. From 2018 to 2020 specifically was Axis. None of their funds could get anything wrong.
[Guest]: There's a company called Mire Asset, they were doing really well. You look at their performances
[Guest]: today, they are less than stellar. So the order of the top has changed, the HDFC guy started to
[Guest]: come back today. If you chose just based on the best, they were those regimes which worked for
[Guest]: a few years and then they stopped working. And if you stuck along with those people who had stopped
[Guest]: over a 10 year period, you found that their good first two, three years notwithstanding,
[Guest]: a 10 year return is less than what I would have got given an index fund. Now, because they're
[Guest]: selling so much, they have to charge higher fees, they end up charging 1 to 2% as fees,
[Guest]: the index fund charges 0.15 or 0.2% as fees. So if your performance just ends up being average,
[Guest]: and you charge 2x the fees, chances are you will underperform just because of the fee differential.
[Guest]: Why do index fund charge lower fees? Because they don't make any decisions on the stocks they buy,
[Guest]: they just have to buy whatever's in the index, in the same weightage as the index. So they don't
[Guest]: have to think too much, because and you pay the money for the thinking, so you put a much lower
[Guest]: fee in there. This is very, very interesting. From a point of view of a person who's investing in the
[Guest]: markets, it comes down to this. If over long periods of time, indexes tend to outperform,
[Guest]: if that is true, no matter when I look, and I don't need to outperform, if I rank all those
[Guest]: mutual funds in a certain list, and if I find that these index funds are in the top quartile,
[Guest]: or maybe even the second quartile, so I call the second quartile thinking, that is if you were in
[Guest]: the second quartile, that means between 26% and 50% of the range of any large list on any given
[Guest]: year, but you are always in the second quartile, and all of the other guys were sometimes in the
[Guest]: first, sometimes the third, last, and so they were randomly in all of them. The guy who's
[Guest]: consistently in the second quartile will outperform everyone on a 10-year basis.
[Guest]: So, unless you got somebody who was consistently in the first quartile, the second quartile guy
[Guest]: always wins. So, the second quartile thinking is what drives my behavior towards index funds.
[Guest]: It is saying, all you have to do, B is a little bit better than average, you will be a little
[Guest]: bit better than average simply because of the fees, you are charging lower fees. Chances are
[Guest]: over a 10-year time frame, you will outperform. Now, if you said, no, Deepak, I want to find who's
[Guest]: in the first quartile, now that takes skill, because you're going to say, this guy is going
[Guest]: to outperform in the first three years, then there's going to be another bunch of guys that
[Guest]: will outperform in the next three years, that takes skill to identify. It requires you to
[Guest]: understand that, oh, I have to do, I have to find the right kind of managers, what kind of stocks
[Guest]: they're picking, is their philosophy consistent with my view of the market, is my view of the
[Guest]: market right? Also, if I was so good, why don't I invest in the stocks directly, etc. These are
[Guest]: the questions that come in. But let's say, whatever that questions are, the answer is,
[Guest]: it takes a certain amount of skill and luck. To reduce the need for skill and luck,
[Guest]: you want to go to the index fund. The most important thing that people don't have is time,
[Guest]: which means time to understand these various funds, time to understand the market, time to
[Guest]: understand whether you should be adding more money to X or Y and making those decisions.
[Guest]: Every decision you make is a grey hair. And if you don't want that many grey hair,
[Guest]: or you have enough decisions in your life already, I mean, I have enough decisions
[Guest]: to make about what time to, each kid wants what. And because you have that many decisions already
[Guest]: to make, adding to decision fatigue is a waste of time, then you want to choose the index fund.
[Guest]: Now, we are crazy people who like the market so much that we go and analyze everything that's
[Guest]: in the market. We say skip the mutual fund, we'll go directly to down to the stocks and buy the
[Guest]: stocks and we want to find a bunch of stocks. I have the inherent feeling that if I am not
[Guest]: able to beat the indexes over a very long period, then it is in my own best interest and my customer's
[Guest]: best interest for me to tell them don't invest with me or give me money, I'll put it in index,
[Guest]: I will not buy stocks based on my own thinking. But like every candidate who gives the IIT exam,
[Guest]: and every average person in India does not make it to IIT, you have to aspire to be above average.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you have to realize the limitations that this and this is not my time
[Guest]: inclination or skill. Maybe I will give an exam if I want to get into the top colleges of the
[Guest]: country. But if it is not my inclination or my skill to do so, I would rather just leave it out
[Guest]: there and say, you know what, I'll outsource, I will give it to an index instead. The point over
[Guest]: here is reduce decision fatigue, bank on the fact that the lower cost is going to make these guys
[Guest]: above average over the long term, and simplify your investing life. I choose a simple strategy
[Guest]: when I've mentioned this in the book saying you got a top 100 India top 100 us simple ways to
[Guest]: access them. Of course, right now, everything sucks, because everything has fallen in the last
[Guest]: two or three months. But that doesn't matter. Over a period long period of time, these things will
[Guest]: still make a lot of money for people. And I believe that this might be a simpler strategy for
[Guest]: most people to follow. It sounds so bad because my pure business, my business is that we tell
[Guest]: people that we're good at identifying stocks. At the same time, we tell people and we're probably
[Guest]: the only people to have something called an index strategy where we charge a very low fee to just be
[Guest]: able to tell people in a disciplined manner, invest in the top 100 US and top 100 in there,
[Guest]: we'll do it for you. So I think our ability to do or to get that done is valuable because it's
[Guest]: it's it's advisors actually good for a significant number of people in the market.
[Guest]: But we're also at the same time saying, listen, we have some stuff that we think can beat it.
[Guest]: And so we'll have to prove it to you over time. But if you are able to prove it, then
[Guest]: we want to be consistent in that first quarter and not even in the second quarter.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we have like, maybe another 40 minutes to talk, which is really not much.
[Amit Varma]: So we can't go through your book in the kind of detail I would have liked. So you know,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one day Deepak, I'm just going to have to do eight hour episodes and nine hour episodes
[Amit Varma]: because every freaking four hour episode I do, it ends with this lament that shit,
[Amit Varma]: that shit, we didn't discuss half the things we wanted to. And then, you know, listeners will
[Amit Varma]: also write in saying, hey, you know, you didn't cover this, you didn't cover that, you didn't
[Amit Varma]: cover this, you didn't cover that. I'm not going to feel squeamish about not covering some of your
[Amit Varma]: book, because I just think it's one of those essential books everyone should have, frankly,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, you're making money for what you owe it to your money to understand how you spend
[Amit Varma]: it. I'm not actually telling my listeners that invest with Deepak, that's a good idea. But I
[Amit Varma]: am telling them that for understand, get a conceptual framework, through which you can look
[Amit Varma]: at your money and kind of talk about that. Now, your chapter on mutual funds is actually very
[Amit Varma]: illuminating the kind of detail you've gone into, I absolutely haven't done justice by asking this
[Amit Varma]: one question and kind of lumping everything, you know, you've described the different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of mutual funds, you've described the different sort of parameters, which one uses when one makes
[Amit Varma]: a judgment. And, you know, we've got different juicy stories like the Franklin Templeton saga
[Amit Varma]: and all that. So there's a lot of funky stuff happening there. Now, you know, moving on from
[Amit Varma]: that in your next chapter, you spoke about a practical approach to investing and why it's
[Amit Varma]: important to plan for after you die. And the best part that you know, the best part of all this was
[Amit Varma]: figure out who you are, where you're right. And I'll quote this, because I think it's such an
[Amit Varma]: important line, where you're right, figure out who you are a strong fundamentals based investor,
[Amit Varma]: a price based technical investor, or simply a person who prefers to stay passive, because man,
[Amit Varma]: you have better things to do with your life, stop quote. And that's important, because it's not as
[Amit Varma]: if there is one alpha male approach or one particular kind of approach, which works.
[Amit Varma]: The point is, whatever you do has to be in sync with your personality and your expectations and
[Amit Varma]: your needs and all of that. And you've handled each of these really separately in different
[Amit Varma]: parts to kind of talk about that. And I sort of found it illuminating. And you also in this
[Amit Varma]: shared a couple of aphorisms by Larry Height, one of which is, if you don't bet, you can't win.
[Amit Varma]: And the other one is, if you lose all your chips, you can't bet. So I sort of like this,
[Amit Varma]: your next chapter is about, you know, shares your own journey and all of that. And one of
[Amit Varma]: the interesting points that you make in your own journey is a fantastic point, where you say that
[Amit Varma]: working a job is just crazy. And you write quote, you work on a job and you get paid a salary,
[Amit Varma]: you stop working, the salary stops. But that's crazy. Because a lot of the things you help to
[Amit Varma]: build will continue to serve the business you work for, stop good. So elaborate on this a bit,
[Amit Varma]: because people often think of working a job as a safe route, and doing other things as a not so
[Amit Varma]: safe route. But actually working a job when you see it under the seed by this lens is incredibly
[Guest]: wasteful. Well, unfortunately, it's the way it is. Okay, I'll give you an example of when you
[Guest]: build things. So when you're working for a business, you're usually helping build something
[Guest]: now that something could be whatever asset it is. So if you're a customer service executive, also,
[Guest]: that customer service that you're doing is helping build confidence and trust in that company. And
[Guest]: you're you're, you know, when you leave that trust still remains in that company that you
[Guest]: were there at that point and help all that stuff. The issue with not having any ownership in what
[Guest]: you've built is that you lose it all when your job stops. But if you had a bit of ownership,
[Guest]: that ownership would help you realize some of that potential in the longer term in years to come.
[Guest]: You could own it as a piece of your own business, you could own it as a piece of someone else's
[Guest]: business. And whether you help it or not is a different aspect. But this having a job and
[Guest]: hoping that it will make you those big amounts of money, I think in the future will become
[Guest]: less and less and less viable. That's because employers are out here and you know, honestly,
[Guest]: we write we do stock market trading and we write today there's an artificial intelligence algorithm
[Guest]: that can write and there's an artificial intelligence algorithm that can trade the
[Guest]: markets. These guys are going to come and wipe me out at some point in time. I know that if I
[Guest]: were thinking of this entire business as a job, I would be threatened. If I'm thinking of it as a
[Guest]: business owner, I want to find that intelligence algorithm, make it right and make it trade and
[Guest]: reap the benefit. Instead of saying I'm employed with an organization where I should be writing
[Guest]: and I should be trading. And if they replace me with an algorithm, I'm finished. The thing like
[Guest]: a business owner, you want to replace yourself, you think like an employee you hate to be replaced.
[Guest]: So that's the point I was trying to make is that it's crazy because you get to not participate
[Guest]: in the benefits of what you build, you get to not make yourself redundant,
[Guest]: because all the incentives are against you to make yourself redundant, when you're actually
[Guest]: adding value to the business that you've created by making yourself redundant in the first place.
[Guest]: Very few businesses recognize this and the ones that do promote you.
[Guest]: And so I think the interesting point about this whole part of this book was to generate a feeling
[Guest]: that you have to have a piece of ownership in a business. And that is what gives you
[Guest]: the eventual satisfaction of having, you know, participated in that business.
[Guest]: I mean, as an as a shareholder, you may not participate in helping the business in any
[Guest]: meaningful way. But sometimes you will be surprised how little public companies even know
[Guest]: of how to handle the simplest and silliest things that for you maybe, you know, I'll tell you this,
[Guest]: your knowledge of podcasting itself is so valuable that if any of the top 50 companies started to do
[Guest]: this, any like literally any one of them saw some of the senior leadership, even build a podcast
[Guest]: around their own company, I would probably buy their shares. Their knowledge of this business is
[Guest]: so clinically vague, I mean, so little that that just the just my recognizing that there is a pulse
[Guest]: somewhere that has shipped itself in this direction. Why aren't our biggest technology
[Guest]: companies? Why don't they have a podcast on technology or anything like that or
[Guest]: anything of the sort? Whereas in the US you find people in large companies very easily adapting to
[Amit Varma]: Podcasts, newsletters, the works, they put themselves out there.
[Guest]: And so, you know, there is a there is a political scientist who analyzes newsletters produced by
[Guest]: the chamber of whatever the US Congress. Wow.
[Guest]: They just analyze the number of times any word and you can search for Narendra Modi and you can
[Guest]: search for, you know, X and Y and Z and Putin and all that stuff by because they just do an analysis
[Guest]: of the list of newsletters produced by the US Congress. Our parliament barely produces words
[Guest]: of coherence, which are not in a newsletter format. But I'm just saying that it's kind of
[Guest]: amazing and surprising that you get, you don't get anything of this sort in any other place.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to really say is that you could help a business by giving them a way to
[Guest]: podcast, but you could own their shares and benefit from the amount of outreach they get
[Guest]: from that podcast itself. And the second one is quite as important as the first. The first will
[Guest]: earn you an amount of money for a limited period of time. The second will probably earn you money
[Guest]: at a later date, but a much larger amount and for a much longer period of time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. So a question that I was saving for close to the end, but since you brought it up
[Amit Varma]: is about AI, right? Now, my sense is like exactly like what you said, that at some point, AI will
[Amit Varma]: make even my writing redundant, frankly, right? It, you know, we used to think I used to think
[Amit Varma]: till a while ago that there are certain things that are a bridge too far for AI. Can AI write
[Amit Varma]: a novel that will make me weep and so on? I think it will. Today, I think it will. I think we should
[Amit Varma]: have had more humility, we've underestimated what AI can do. And whatever I see on the frontiers is
[Amit Varma]: just kind of blows me away. And I think that's a damn good thing. It fills me with happiness.
[Amit Varma]: If AI takes over all of this, and it, it kind of means that one, we have more good books to read,
[Amit Varma]: right? And we have a far higher quality of life, the kind of value that will be saved.
[Amit Varma]: Like once, you know, if AGI ever comes artificial general intelligence, for example,
[Amit Varma]: people paint a dystopian vision of the future. You know, I'm not worried about it, because
[Amit Varma]: at least in the short term, I think what will add like in the extreme short term, yeah, sure,
[Amit Varma]: there is that kind of displacement, which new technology does. But always, when that happens,
[Amit Varma]: the benefits are way more than the costs. And this could just be something that eliminates
[Amit Varma]: poverty. Now in your field, it's kind of inevitable that when you're dealing with
[Amit Varma]: large flows of information, with patterns and trends that are beyond human comprehension,
[Amit Varma]: that eventually, AI will completely own the scene. Now, you've taken the pragmatic view
[Amit Varma]: that of course it will. So I will be the business owner who will use AI in the best way possible.
[Amit Varma]: But taking an even longer view than that, isn't it kind of inevitable that at one point,
[Amit Varma]: not just the employee, you know, say an investment firm, but the investment firm itself
[Amit Varma]: will be redundant, because people will be, you know, just able to kind of do it all themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, as a related kind of question, because this is not really a question,
[Amit Varma]: it feels like an observation. I feel like one of those old men at this book launch,
[Amit Varma]: who will stand up at the end and say, I have a question, and then they will ramble for 10 minutes
[Amit Varma]: and not ask anything. I think I'm turning into one of those uncles. But my actual question is,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, whatever the state of the world is, at any point in time, you know, it normalizes,
[Amit Varma]: and then we assume this is the natural state of things. And we are looking at stock markets and
[Amit Varma]: a financial system like that, where the, you know, the basic paradigms, you assume it will stay like
[Amit Varma]: this forever, that this is why stock markets came into being. And, you know, those purposes will
[Amit Varma]: always be served by something that looks like this. But if you peer into the future, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you sort of look at the Wild West forming around us, and any Wild West, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: crypto and Web3 and all that is initially full of frauds and very nebulous and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But there is something there to look at, which could look completely different 30 years from now.
[Amit Varma]: So, do you see in a way that these ramparts itself changing that, you know, a future where
[Amit Varma]: the things that we achieve through stock markets or the financial system and all of that,
[Guest]: are achieved in a very different kind of setup? It's possible. I mean, we've always seen,
[Guest]: we've seen financialization only in the last 100-150 years. Before that, there was a lot of
[Guest]: other stuff that was happening, barter, for instance, and all that stuff. The way the
[Guest]: financial economy is today can easily change to a different kind of financial economy in the in the
[Guest]: future, where you're the crypto in crypto, if you put the non-scammy part of crypto is like this,
[Guest]: I pay you with something that can appreciate in value. So, instead of paying you 100 rupees,
[Guest]: which you know is worth 100 rupees now and 100 rupees tomorrow, I pay you in the form of 100
[Guest]: coins and those coins can go up in value in terms of rupees tomorrow. You want to deal with me
[Guest]: because you think that the value of these things. So, for you, it's a double edged thing. It's not
[Guest]: only that I'm paying you for the work that you do, but also that I'm paying you in something that can
[Guest]: potentially grow by itself. For some, this paradigm is interesting. It's like me paying
[Guest]: you by the shares of my company, rather than by cash, shares of my company, I can still print
[Guest]: and give it to you. Today, there are regulatory frameworks that don't allow me to do this very
[Guest]: easily. But assuming I was able to do it, I could have created another company that owns a bunch of
[Guest]: my shares. And I can pay you through that company whenever I want saying instead of paying a 1 lakh
[Guest]: rupees worth this thing, I'll be in 1 lakh rupees of my shares and effectively print my own money.
[Guest]: If I was able to do this, then a lot more avenues open. Banks are not banks are currently the only
[Guest]: guys allowed to print money, banks print money by nature, but banks are heavily regulated. So,
[Guest]: they have certain things, but companies are not so they could issue shares at at whatever valuation
[Guest]: to somebody else and issuing shares, you could replace the word share by a coin, and you would be
[Guest]: roughly the same. So, building a framework like this, out of crypto and into the real world
[Guest]: is not very difficult, we can absorb that stuff and build it here. We can use the same concepts
[Guest]: that crypto is doing. So, crypto is something called automated market making a form of saying
[Guest]: that if you pay me one share of Reliance, I can pay you back 100 rupees or 2000 rupees or whatever
[Guest]: that number is that is discovered by the market today. But what if I told you I'll exchange your
[Guest]: one share of Reliance for one share of TCS. So, you the difference between the two is that I don't
[Guest]: even have shares of Reliance and TCS. Somebody else has given me shares of Reliance and some
[Guest]: other person has given me shares of TCS. I am just building a balanced pool of them too. So,
[Guest]: when you give me a Reliance, I give you a TCS for a predefined exchange rate
[Guest]: that's currently ongoing, this can be completely automated. The net result of this is you can trade
[Guest]: with me. And I don't need to be a human being, I can be a complete algorithm that is determining
[Guest]: the prices dynamically based on supply and demand. This is already happening in the crypto world.
[Guest]: This has been happening in the forex world for the longest amount of time. So, you can give me USD,
[Guest]: I'll give you INR. They're almost all run by computers, 97%. Has this removed the need for
[Guest]: a human being to exist? I think no, they just go one level higher. Which means instead of the guys
[Guest]: who are trading, they are the guys who are designing these algorithms. They are the guys
[Guest]: who are figuring out how to get more done through these algorithms, to the extent where some today,
[Guest]: it has helped a lot of people. For instance, when you travel, you use a card, they charge you a 3%
[Guest]: fee, then a 0.5% fee, then something else and GST and so on. So, you end up paying some 4 or 5%
[Guest]: as a transaction fee. There's a startup that's come and built an algorithmic trading framework
[Guest]: that says, when you swipe the card, we'll give you the best price possible because we've eliminated
[Guest]: all the intermediate bullshit that happens in this whole picture. And you can swipe a card for
[Guest]: $100 and we'll charge you only 75 rupees when the going rate is 74.80. So, the only 20 paisa
[Guest]: spread versus a 76 rupees, which would have, you know, had to pay otherwise. So, this is technology
[Guest]: where the actual trading, which would otherwise have been done manually, has been done by a
[Guest]: computer. But the benefit that's being provided is being intermediated by a human being who's
[Guest]: selling you, listen, I have the tech to do all this stuff. I'm going to simplify your life,
[Guest]: I'm going to make it cheaper for you to travel. And guess what, this allows you to travel more,
[Guest]: more destinations, less painful to do all these transactions, and more deterministic. So,
[Guest]: you can actually tell you that if you swipe right now, this is the price you'll get on an app,
[Guest]: versus otherwise you'd have to call somebody and say, what's the rate today? And you know,
[Guest]: that stuff. So, I think we'll just kick ourselves one level higher. Instead of writing the books,
[Guest]: we'll be doing something one level higher, which is not writing the books, but finding ways to
[Guest]: distribute them, finding ways to get them across. Whether it is the context in which those books are
[Guest]: written, or whether it is something else, I don't know. I can't foresee it that much. But all I know
[Guest]: is that we will be one level higher. Humans have always found a way to evolve to a point where
[Guest]: their need is, or not just that their need is, it's like saying, you know, just because you've
[Guest]: bought a harvester doesn't mean people stopped farming. It's the same people that were otherwise
[Guest]: plowing the fields that are now using harvesters, there are more fields to plow. So, we'll find more
[Guest]: fields within the same thing, and do things better. Tomorrow, it may be that the same concept
[Guest]: can be used for five different things, rather than that one thing, which is writing a book.
[Guest]: Tomorrow, I mean, it's already happening, right? Earlier, it was only books. Now, it is books,
[Guest]: blogs, videos, podcasts, X, same content delivered or rendered five different ways. Maybe that's what
[Guest]: the AI will end up helping with, which is, what's the best way to produce this format that allows
[Guest]: you to visualize and see this. Books will come to life in more meaningful ways than us just having
[Amit Varma]: to write them. Yeah, I think there'll be unknown unknowns. I think we'll also write, but I once
[Amit Varma]: said about Trump that Trump would fail the Turing test. So, I think humans should have a little bit
[Amit Varma]: of humility about their own natural intelligence, so to say. So, my next question is also a broad
[Amit Varma]: one. And this is again, at one level, it is me thinking aloud and also asking a question which
[Amit Varma]: I've chatted about with the two guests I recorded with over the last two days. And here's the thing,
[Amit Varma]: earlier, we spoke about how the mainstream is dissipating. Media is dissipating, music,
[Amit Varma]: where the mainstream is dissipating, everywhere the mainstream is dissipating, what you're having
[Amit Varma]: is a certain kind of decentralization, right? Now, in the context, like I was chatting with the
[Amit Varma]: with former Foreign Secretary and Ambassador Nirupama Rao day before yesterday, she's written
[Amit Varma]: an excellent book on China, The Fractured Himalaya. And she was talking about how in Tibet earlier,
[Amit Varma]: when they would make maps, they would not put those lines of nation states, a mountain was a
[Amit Varma]: mountain, a river was a river, those are the maps they would make. And her additional point to that,
[Amit Varma]: which I feel is so true, is that, you know, when you look at peoples, it's almost as if peoples
[Amit Varma]: with exactly the same culture, with cultural continuity have been divided by these artificial
[Amit Varma]: lines of nation states. Now, I think you and I understand data well enough to know that a sample
[Amit Varma]: size of years for which nation states has existed is really too low to come to a conclusion about
[Amit Varma]: them or say that they're inevitable, or they're always here to stay. In fact, many modern problems
[Amit Varma]: come about because of our rigid notions of nation states and these artificial boundaries, which
[Amit Varma]: divide us where no divisions need exist. And I'm again thinking, you know, one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: people who talk about crypto say that decentralization, that, you know, it's one way to
[Amit Varma]: get away from the tyranny of nation states, from the oppressiveness of, you know, parasitic nation
[Amit Varma]: states, and so on and so forth. And I find it interesting. So this is not really a question
[Amit Varma]: about finance per se, for a moment, we've moved away from your book. But is this something that
[Amit Varma]: you kind of think about that we take it for granted, but is the primacy of nation states
[Amit Varma]: in our thinking that even if they exist, maybe they won't be so important. Maybe they won't be
[Amit Varma]: such a big deal. Maybe by necessity borders become more fluid. Maybe physical borders don't become
[Amit Varma]: more fluid, but other borders do. I'm just kind of thinking a lot because it seems to me to be this
[Amit Varma]: secular trend of decentralization across everything that you can think of. So you know, isn't that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just as a mainstream media newspaper or a Hollywood studio might at some point become
[Amit Varma]: redundant, why would central banks not become redundant and so on?
[Guest]: Well, it's true, it could happen even now. Let's not take crypto. Let's say we were all playing,
[Guest]: I don't know, Minesweeper, or I mean, some game, Minecraft. And you earned a few things in that
[Guest]: Minecraft, you had a bunch of chests, and it had certain objects in it. And you could trade those
[Guest]: objects with each other. And all those objects had very nicely predefined values. So I could trade
[Guest]: with you, you can then surpass the trade nation state by just playing Minecraft. You could say I
[Guest]: want this particular thing. And I don't care if you're in Croatia or Serbia, or you know,
[Guest]: South Southern Sudan, but I will give you something worth five sickles. If you know,
[Guest]: now, you don't need crypto for this. Crypto is a nice way to do it. But barter has existed for
[Guest]: centuries. The reason we've stuck on currencies is because nobody can agree on the value of anything.
[Guest]: In the end, it comes down to listen, I got to know what $1 means. And if I know what $1 means,
[Guest]: more than I know that what one sickle means, I'll go to the dollar. So the dollar has been a medium
[Guest]: of exchange, the rupee has been a medium of exchange, only for that reason that people
[Guest]: could not agree on the value of something. If they're able to find something else where they
[Guest]: agree with the value of and one of the biggest things they agree on the value of is gold,
[Guest]: for instance. But gold comes with challenges of being used as a currency because of its nature,
[Guest]: you can't cut it beyond a certain point and all that stuff. But digital things like sickles and
[Guest]: all that stuff can be and I can buy one fourth of a sickle. Somebody has just put something in
[Guest]: court to it. I think it's a very interesting construct. But don't you think that the
[Guest]: the separation of nation state and economics has already happened. We consume Google, or Amazon,
[Guest]: well Google to some extent Facebook, anybody in the world can advertise to us.
[Guest]: They have surpassed the nation state by saying we are Facebook, you can find a guy in India.
[Guest]: And if you're a person in Denmark, you can advertise to that guy in Bangalore. This is
[Guest]: amazing, because earlier you needed the physical approach, you need to send something over here
[Guest]: and then get it out. Now you can do this worldwide. We've surpassed the nation state
[Guest]: through technology in many, many ways. I could now order digital goods from the Kindle store,
[Guest]: which is produced anywhere else in the world, in any language, I could buy a Swahili book,
[Guest]: earlier it was impossible. So once you've got past the, I mean, even within the nation,
[Guest]: the state boundaries of whatever they were, I am a weird guy when it comes to shoes. Okay,
[Guest]: so in a sense, I hate buying shoes. But I find it fascinating that today I can buy something for
[Guest]: 499 rupees, that's made in Punjab, that the guy is making a 50% profit on by selling it to me at
[Guest]: 499. And yet, I could not find that thing in a shop in Bangalore for the last 15 years. I can
[Guest]: go to Amazon today and pick it up or Flipkart today and pick it up by just going online and
[Guest]: seeing it because for him, the logistics of bringing it to Bangalore have been sorted out
[Guest]: by multiple third parties in the middle, so that his 499 price point also yields him a 50% profit.
[Guest]: I find this fascinating that that has already been done within India. But because of its physical
[Guest]: nature, it's not transcended the nation state. But the digital good has. Today, I could read
[Guest]: books, I could read anything I could, if it was possible, invest in stocks abroad.
[Guest]: If they were willing to take my rupees. But outside of India, the other nation states have
[Guest]: figured out how to deal with Neetha's currency seamlessly. We have our own little RBI sitting
[Guest]: on our head with a hammer. But you could buy stocks of any country sitting anywhere else in
[Guest]: the world by just using the internet today. This is a way we've surpassed it. We've just not found
[Guest]: the right ways to pay for things worldwide. But eventually, if Facebook were to issue its own
[Guest]: coin, and people were able to pay each other with Facebook coins, that could become a currency of
[Guest]: the world. And by the way, this is not just me saying it, they're thinking it actively,
[Guest]: they're going to build something called the metaverse, where they're going to do exactly
[Guest]: this, which is to have their own world, because they can't have a real one, they want to make
[Guest]: one, they want to make a virtual one. In that all the currencies will be Facebook's own currency.
[Guest]: The minute you're in it, and because there are other people in it from God knows which other
[Guest]: state, they are nation state, they're all going to want to interact with each other, they're all
[Guest]: going to pay a Facebook a tiny piece of that pie, not tiny, it's going to be a big piece of that
[Guest]: pie. But their fascination is to do that, you know, the minute this dream comes close to becoming a
[Guest]: reality, you can bet that the guys with guns will react violently and take down some part of this
[Guest]: operation. And the same with crypto. At some point, the guys with guns will come in and say no. So I
[Guest]: don't know what that point is. And maybe I'm getting it wrong. And maybe the guys with guns
[Guest]: are the ones that already own these bitcoins and all of that stuff. And they're laughing all their
[Guest]: way when we are saying that, you know, but I'm just saying that the paradigms will shift,
[Guest]: we will change, it will change and it's already transcending the nation state in ways we can't
[Amit Varma]: imagine. I think the guys with guns will get together with the guys with money. That's how
[Amit Varma]: it always happens, right? So there's a good friend of mine, I won't name him, but we used to play
[Amit Varma]: together a lot in Mumbai when I was playing live cash games. And then of course, I retired and
[Amit Varma]: he went on to become perhaps the country's finest player based in Delhi, but now taken permanent
[Amit Varma]: residency in Dubai, where he once played a nine crore pot equivalent of that. But anyway,
[Amit Varma]: I gossip about all of that is offline. So I was hanging out with him recently, when I went to
[Amit Varma]: Delhi, he also happened to be there. And I was kind of chatting with him about what the poker
[Amit Varma]: economy is like. And so much of the poker economy is now crypto, right? So he's in Dubai, no taxes,
[Amit Varma]: some of the money is whatever currency you want it in, but a lot of it is crypto. And then he can
[Amit Varma]: use that crypto to deposit money in US gambling sites where he can play poker, and he can withdraw
[Amit Varma]: from there in crypto, right? And it's a and the complexity of it all like from the outside,
[Amit Varma]: we sometimes get the impression that it's a wild west and, you know, and all of that, but there's
[Amit Varma]: a very sophisticated economy kind of running in there, which is fascinating. And everything you
[Amit Varma]: say resonates like how the nation state is actually so much less relevant in our lives today,
[Amit Varma]: than it was 30 years ago, that is kind of just mind blowing. So we have 12 minutes to go. So
[Amit Varma]: I'll ask my final question. I think that alone is something we can iterate on a bit, which is
[Amit Varma]: that supposing a person like me, and although I will never get down to it, but it's an intention,
[Amit Varma]: supposing a person like me comes to you and says that boss, you know, I really respect your
[Amit Varma]: knowledge of finance and investing and all of that. And I find it fascinating just at an
[Amit Varma]: intellectual level, I also want to learn, right? But what are the resources? How do I learn this?
[Guest]: This is a very good question. Because the question isn't, it's like saying I want to learn music.
[Guest]: Because then my first question would be what kind of music? Because there are there's the
[Guest]: Carnatic and Indian classical, there's Western classical, there's hip hop, there's rock,
[Guest]: there's pop, there's a bunch of others. And then there's new paradigms like EDM that
[Amit Varma]: Okay, let me clarify that and pause that because I recorded recently with Warren Mendonca of
[Amit Varma]: Blackstrat Blues. And he told me that increasingly as he listens to different kinds of music across
[Amit Varma]: the world, he's coming to the conclusion that they all have something in common,
[Amit Varma]: which could be the pentatonic scale or whatever, you know, but they all have,
[Amit Varma]: there's a universal pentatonic as it were. Is there something like that in?
[Guest]: There is, I mean, in the end, the similarity with almost all forms of investing is that if I put in
[Guest]: X, I want to get more than X out of it. If X was a commodity of some sort, there was no chance you
[Guest]: could get more out of it. For instance, when you invest in gold, you take the gold, you can't get
[Guest]: more gold out of it, it's never going to produce anything more than just the gold that it is.
[Guest]: But when we invest in certain other things like a house, you want to invest in a house,
[Guest]: somebody's going to pay you some rent and the house is going to be worth more when you sell it.
[Guest]: If you invest in a stock, you're expected to pay some dividends and give. So I think this is
[Guest]: universal as a phenomenon that you want to achieve out of it. But there are concepts that remain.
[Guest]: If you divide this world into people who have the skill, inclination and time to invest,
[Guest]: and people who don't. So just to the people who don't necessarily have to find someone else who
[Guest]: does and hand them over their money. Or choose something as safe as a government bond or a fixed
[Guest]: deposit to invest. So for them, the choices are very clear. Find the right person who will make
[Guest]: the right decisions or, you know, so that is, that is, I think, a universal phenomenon, no matter
[Guest]: what. So if you want to learn about it, your idea would essentially be, how do I learn about the
[Guest]: various forms of investing that's out there that I don't want to do myself, I want to use a vehicle
[Guest]: like a mutual fund to do, I just need to be able to select the right kind of mutual funds to do it.
[Guest]: You can go to varying degrees of complexity here, similar to music, where you could do something in
[Guest]: x now x degrees or the simplest form would be passive funds that are spread broadly across
[Guest]: the world. The more complex would be I want to invest in different sectors and I want to find
[Guest]: a manager who will do the best in each sector and so on. Another form would be directly investing
[Guest]: in stocks or not, well, since we're still giving money to other managers, we're just finding the
[Guest]: right managers. I find a guy who can invest in startups that have a potentially large return,
[Guest]: I give him 5% of my money. My job is to figure out if should I give him 5% of my money or 20%
[Guest]: of my money. That's my allocate, I'm an allocator. So my knowledge goes to the aspect of saying I
[Guest]: understand which asset class I want to invest in. My job is to find the right managers and give them
[Guest]: money. I could be on the flip side of the table where I have the time, inclination, and skill,
[Guest]: where I say, listen, I'm directly going to invest, which means I'm going to take my money,
[Guest]: I'm going to allocate it to some startups, some which I understand and analyze, some stocks,
[Guest]: which I analyze, or something else. So there's a bit of the passive and a bit of the active in
[Guest]: each one of us. So while I typically suggest the path should be start with passive and go down to
[Guest]: active, a typical person's path is like this, he starts with active, goes to zero, then comes back
[Guest]: into passive, then gets excited a little goes into active, puts a little too much into active,
[Guest]: then figures out passive is better, and then starts balancing the two. So it's a little bit of a
[Guest]: lizard's walk or a snake's walk across these two paradigms.
[Amit Varma]: Lizards walk down Wall Street.
[Guest]: Down there you go. So this is this is unfortunate, but this is how people are by behavior. And I
[Guest]: think we should promote that because if you tell them that there's only this path to go there,
[Guest]: they will never do it. So I hate to say this, but if you force people down the virtuous path,
[Guest]: they will shun you. So you have to give them the bad part, make them learn from their mistakes.
[Guest]: And then, I mean, you have to give them the option of the good and the bad part,
[Guest]: and they'll take the bad part and come to the good part eventually. Or when I say good, I mean,
[Guest]: it doesn't necessarily mean good from my perspective, I'm looking at averages here.
[Guest]: So there will always be some people who shine at what they do right from day one. But having said
[Guest]: that, I think the point over here that you have to look at from an investing perspective is,
[Guest]: do you understand what you're investing in? And are you taking the active path or the passive
[Guest]: path? And be really clear about the difference between the two. For instance, if I choose a
[Guest]: mutual fund manager, and then every month I look at which stocks he's bought, and call him up and
[Guest]: say, why have you bought this stock? Like, boss, what are you doing? Are you trusting the manager
[Guest]: or you want to do it yourself? Why don't you buy the stocks directly? Take the active route. Now,
[Guest]: why are you going on this passive route and haranguing the manager, fund manager for this?
[Guest]: On the other hand, if you're, if you're taking the active route, and then, you know,
[Guest]: trying to feel miserable, you're feeling miserable that the passive guys are doing so much better
[Guest]: than you are, then, you know, you're doing the wrong thing, you should just be putting in more
[Guest]: money into the passive route. I don't know if there's any commonality over here. But I think
[Guest]: this would apply to whether you're investing in real estate, whether you're investing in crypto,
[Guest]: whether you're investing in stocks and debt and mutual funds, or in fact, investing in art.
[Guest]: There are some people who just get art, there's some people like me, who can look at an image for
[Guest]: hours and say, I still think it's a banana taped to a wall. And I will not get it. So
[Amit Varma]: you're like the security guard in Russia, you heard about him? There's a big museum in Russia
[Amit Varma]: or something and the security guard is left there and it's his first job and he's feeling really
[Amit Varma]: bored. So there's a painting there, which has all these people with, you know, round faces and no
[Amit Varma]: eyes and all and he went and painted eyes on all of them, destroyed a few million worth of value.
[Amit Varma]: So you're like that guy Deepak? It's possible.
[Guest]: But inclination, maybe not behavior. Yeah, my inclination. I don't know, man. I mean,
[Guest]: that would make me a person who wants to be an artist. I don't think I have that kind of level
[Amit Varma]: of inclination. So you know, just now when you were talking about how you can tell somebody what
[Amit Varma]: to do, but this is a path they'll take, they'll make the mistakes, right? You almost sounded like
[Amit Varma]: a resigned parent, you're practicing like maybe for what you will say 15 years later,
[Amit Varma]: that I, you know, I gave good advice to my kids, but they have to make their own mistakes. I can't
[Amit Varma]: do anything. Now you kind of sound like that. I hope it's not like that. If, you know, Deepak's
[Amit Varma]: kids are listening to this in future kindly, you know.
[Guest]: Well, they'll probably tell you that the first part, which is my dad keeps giving sermons,
[Guest]: but they'll probably not admit the second part at any point, which is fine, because I never
[Guest]: admitted in my life that my parents were right about a few things, which I'm fine with because,
[Guest]: you know, at some point, you're you're you speak from you're a victim of your own experiences,
[Guest]: which is why I can't deal with crypto. But if I was not a victim of my own experiences, then
[Guest]: maybe I would have accepted crypto a lot easier, like the younger kids do nowadays,
[Guest]: and found the virtue in it before I find all the scams.
[Amit Varma]: I won't even say we're not victims of our experiences. We are products of our experiences.
[Amit Varma]: You know, let us not be like those people who embrace narratives of victimhood.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, yes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one one complaint I have about this latest answer of yours
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, I keep telling my writing students that, you know, avoid the abstract,
[Amit Varma]: go for the concrete. So I asked you a question about what can I do to learn and you give me a
[Amit Varma]: long abstract answer, which is very illuminating. And I conceptually I agree with it is very clear.
[Amit Varma]: But now I will ask you right at the end as the last part of the last question that get concrete
[Amit Varma]: here like which which are the best books to read on this? Which are the best videos to watch on
[Amit Varma]: this? Is there a series on YouTube? Is there a course I should do? Who are the good thinkers?
[Guest]: So I think Zerodha Varsity and that is one of the best things that go around for Indian. So the
[Guest]: Indian stocks, Indian macroeconomics, bonds, mutual funds, they have great content for a
[Guest]: beginner. So I personally think that that is one of the best resources for investing in India.
[Guest]: If you're looking at more such content, go to fool.com, which is Motley Fool,
[Guest]: they have a great set of content around stocks, stock markets in the US in general.
[Guest]: So the book itself contains a primer into what my book itself money wise contains a primer into
[Guest]: what stocks are not mutual funds are, and how to build your own personal financial plan, because
[Guest]: there's two parts of things, right? One is which stocks to buy in which this thing,
[Guest]: but more broadly, how to handle your own hygiene, your own stock asset allocation,
[Guest]: and handle the fact that you have to invest regularly every month. That is that would be one,
[Guest]: there are a bunch of videos on YouTube, and every day YouTube is evolving with this kind of
[Guest]: framework. But I would say, depending on the kind of content you want, so if you want stock specific
[Guest]: content, there are a number of, you know, YouTubers who specifically talk about certain stocks,
[Guest]: whether it's in the pharma space, or it's so they actually uncover those stocks. For instance, I
[Guest]: mean, right now, I could think of, there is a lady called CA Rachana Ranade, who talks a lot about
[Guest]: investing per se. There is Ishmohit, who built a YouTube channel called the School of Intrinsic
[Guest]: Compounding. There are a bunch of interviews by various people in them by the CNBC and the
[Guest]: money control people invest, they've interviewed a lot of the older investors who've given master
[Guest]: classes on how to identify interesting stocks and look at if you send me links to some that you
[Guest]: liked, I'll put them in the show notes, I'll put these up there. We have a bunch of older videos
[Guest]: around mutual funds as well that talk about the basics of mutual funds, concepts of bond yields,
[Guest]: what are the different things around it. So there are I think, you know, the YouTube universe itself
[Guest]: is very dynamic and changing. But it's a very interesting set of courses. My problem with most
[Guest]: of my studying or reading has been that it has been so, you know, so I'll give you some books,
[Guest]: for instance, all my books tend to be the books I mentioned tend to be not self help by nature. So
[Guest]: most of them will talk about so I'll give you an example of there's a book called Liar Spoker by
[Guest]: Michael Lewis, extremely good book built around Salomon brothers and their trading of junk bonds
[Guest]: in the early 80s to the 90s. This was this was a brilliant book because of the way it was written
[Guest]: and it emphasizes the greed and fear that existed in bond markets, junk bond markets specifically
[Guest]: at the time. There's a book called Buffett by Roger Loewenstein. Now this is one of the few
[Guest]: books that does not eulogize Buffett, but gives it gives it a more even look. And maybe it appeals
[Guest]: to me as a person who has read so many books about Buffett that he wanted a more, you know,
[Amit Varma]: even kind of. And Loewenstein also wrote When Genius Failed about LTCM, right? When Genius
[Guest]: Failed is one of his biggest masterpieces in terms of the, but apart from that, there's a book called
[Guest]: Walk Down Wall Street or something by Peter Lynch, where he gives some very basic ideas
[Guest]: on how to beat them, how to talk about market. There is a book called, I mean, this is interesting
[Guest]: now more esoteric and the interviews of traders, Larry Hite, a quote I got from a book called
[Guest]: Market Wizards by Jack Schwager, and he has written four series. So Market Wizards, New Market
[Amit Varma]: Wizards, Stock Market Wizards. I think you recommended it last time. And then I downloaded
[Amit Varma]: it. It was in my show notes. And I was reading some of it. See, we are so old, we forget that
[Amit Varma]: we've already done some. No, no, no. But there what you had done is you had said that you guys
[Amit Varma]: had done some blog posts about your favorite books within Capital Mind. And I just linked to that.
[Amit Varma]: That's it. But I'm enjoying this more because it's like it's coming out of you as personal.
[Guest]: So the interesting thing about those books is their interviews of traders who some of whom
[Guest]: have been extremely successful, some of and most of whom you never have heard of. I mean,
[Guest]: you've heard of a George Soros or Stanley Druckenmiller because of their fame and they're
[Guest]: bringing down the British pound and all that stuff. But you wouldn't have heard of Larry Hite
[Guest]: for some many people wouldn't have heard of him. You wouldn't have heard of a story of something
[Guest]: called the turtles. The turtles were if you remember trading places, trading places is a
[Guest]: place where two rich guys say that, you know, trading in the stock market can be learned.
[Guest]: The other guy says, no, it's a born innate skill. And they sort of make a bet is a bet of a dollar.
[Guest]: And one guy says, I'll just pick a random guy off the street and I'll teach him how to win in
[Guest]: the market. And he picks up this guy and you know, eventually it becomes very famous. He becomes a
[Guest]: big stock market trader and the guy wins. There was a real actual world example of this, where
[Guest]: there was a guy called Richard Dennis and another guy I forget his name. They had a bet that Richard
[Guest]: Dennis said he could trade, he could train people to trade like they breed turtles in Singapore.
[Guest]: So these people he hired, and he trained them were all called the turtles and all went on to make
[Guest]: very, very, it's like teaching people poker the scientific way, which is to always work with odds
[Guest]: and, you know, probabilities and eventually you'll win if you just play enough. So he's found out the
[Guest]: stock market is similar, you just play by the rules. So he found people who could play by the
[Guest]: rules, who had the behavioral structure to play by rules. And those people eventually actually
[Guest]: made a lot of money. Some of them retired very early, some of them didn't do so well, but a good
[Guest]: portion of them did. Turtles was a very interesting example. And he's interviewed a lot of the turtles
[Guest]: and Richard Dennis in this book as well. So it's fascinating because it gives you a
[Guest]: ringside view of all of this. And of course, this was the 80s and 90s. Today is well, I don't know,
[Guest]: I don't read quite as much nowadays. And perhaps more content comes in YouTube and podcasts. But
[Guest]: if you like podcasts, then this is strictly invest. No, not strictly invest. What is it
[Guest]: called? Invest like the best. Invest like the best. Patrick O'Shaughnessy. This is a brilliant,
[Guest]: you know, podcast of only people, he invests only people in the investing world,
[Guest]: mostly American. I like that podcast because it like it makes you think and it has a very
[Guest]: interesting investing insights as well. So I'll stop there because too many resources.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I'll add one book to this. I don't know if you've heard of this guy called Deepak
[Amit Varma]: Shanoi. Friend of mine, he's written this book called Money Wise, timeless lessons on building
[Amit Varma]: wealth. So do pick up Money Wise from Deepak Shanoi and you will learn a lot. Deepak dude,
[Amit Varma]: thanks so much, man. You've been so patient. Like I just want to tell my listeners that we
[Amit Varma]: are recording this like I came to Bangalore to record a bunch of episodes and Deepak has this
[Amit Varma]: really swank YouTube cum podcasting studio in his office. It's mind blowing. And so we started
[Amit Varma]: recording at 10 and we had like lunch in between and coffee in between and it's now 530 that we
[Amit Varma]: are kind of wrapping everything up and all day he's been fielding frantic calls from people saying
[Amit Varma]: Russia has invaded Ukraine. What now? The market is crashing all over the place. Three people have
[Amit Varma]: already jumped off the top floor of this building. It's chaos outside and Deepak, you've been so kind.
[Guest]: Thank you so much. This is brilliant. In fact, great to have you here. Great to have done this.
[Guest]: I think thanks for all the comments in the office as well. This is like the whole team
[Guest]: has been building this for the last year. It's been fantastic. But more importantly,
[Guest]: I've had fun doing this episode. I hope you've had fun listening to it. I know that probably
[Guest]: good portion of this deserves to be chopped off just simply because there's hours and
[Amit Varma]: we don't chop nothing off. Listen, there'll be people saying you do another five hours with
[Amit Varma]: Deepak. I'm guaranteeing you it will happen. One of these days we should do like a late night
[Amit Varma]: session if you're not in Bangalore. I think what is left is stream. You know what you and
[Guest]: I should do a stream and do an Ask Me Anything. Yeah, fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And then it's up to others to make it last as long as you want. As long as you want.
[Amit Varma]: As if you don't have a life. You know, I can afford to do it. But your time is worth a little
[Amit Varma]: bit more than that. However, having said that you are buying 499 rupees shoes, I don't know where.
[Guest]: I hate buying shoes. So I just buy this for a fascination of mine. But dude, thanks so much.
[Guest]: Amit, this has been great. And you know, welcome again to the Seen and Done scene.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and thank you so much for coming on the Capital Mind Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hey, hop on over to your nearest bookstore,
[Amit Varma]: online or offline, and buy Deepak's wonderful book, Money Wise, timeless lessons on building
[Amit Varma]: wealth. You can follow Deepak on Twitter at Deepak Shenoy. That's one word at Deepak Shenoy.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of
[Amit Varma]: the Seen and the Unseen at SeenUnseen.in. Thank you for listening.